Abaca (n.) The Manila-hemp plant (Musa textilis); also, its fiber. See Manila hemp under Manila.
Abbey (n.) A monastery or society of persons of either sex, secluded from the world and devoted to religion and celibacy; also, the monastic building or buildings.
Abies (n.) A genus of coniferous trees, properly called Fir, as the balsam fir and the silver fir. The spruces are sometimes also referred to this genus.
Abode (n.) Place of continuance, or where one dwells; abiding place; residence; a dwelling; a habitation.
Abuna (n.) The Patriarch, or head of the Abyssinian Church.
Abyss (n.) A bottomless or unfathomed depth, gulf, or chasm; hence, any deep, immeasurable, and, specifically, hell, or the bottomless pit.
Acorn (n.) The fruit of the oak, being an oval nut growing in a woody cup or cupule. 2. A cone-shaped piece of wood on the point of the spindle above the vane, on the mast-head.
Acton (n.) A stuffed jacket worn under the mail, or (later) a jacket plated with mail.
Actor (n.) One who acts, or takes part in any affair; a doer.
Adage (n.) An old saying, which has obtained credit by long use; a proverb.
Addax (n.) One of the largest African antelopes (Hippotragus, / Oryx, nasomaculatus).
Adder (n.) One who, or that which, adds; esp., a machine for adding numbers. 2. In America, the term is commonly applied to several harmless snakes, as the milk adder, puffing adder, etc.
Adept (n.) One fully skilled or well versed in anything; a proficient; as, adepts in philosophy.
Adobe (n.) An unburnt brick dried in the sun; also used as an adjective, as, an adobe house, in Texas or New Mexico.
Adult (n.) A person, animal, or plant grown to full size and strength; one who has reached maturity.
Aerie (n.) The nest of a bird of prey, as of an eagle or hawk; also a brood of such birds; eyrie. Shak. Also fig.: A human residence or resting place perched like an eagle's nest.
Agama (n.) A genus of lizards, one of the few which feed upon vegetable substances; also, one of these lizards.
Agami (n.) A South American bird (Psophia crepitans), allied to the cranes, and easily domesticated; -- called also the gold-breasted trumpeter. Its body is about the size of the pheasant. See Trumpeter.
Agape (n.) The love feast of the primitive Christians, being a meal partaken of in connection with the communion.
Agate (n.) A semipellucid, uncrystallized variety of quartz, presenting various tints in the same specimen. Its colors are delicately arranged in stripes or bands, or blended in clouds. 2. A kind of type, larger than pearl and smaller than nonpareil; in England called ruby. 3. A tool used by gold-wire drawers, bookbinders, etc.; -- so called from the agate fixed in it for burnishing.
Agave (n.) A genus of plants (order Amaryllidaceae) of which the chief species is the maguey or century plant (A. Americana), wrongly called Aloe. It is from ten to seventy years, according to climate, in attaining maturity, when it produces a gigantic flower stem, sometimes forty feet in height, and perishes. The fermented juice is the pulque of the Mexicans; distilled, it yields mescal. A strong thread and a tough paper are made from the leaves, and the wood has many uses.
Agent (n.) One who exerts power, or has the power to act; an actor. 2. One who acts for, or in the place of, another, by authority from him; one intrusted with the business of another; a substitute; a deputy; a factor. 3. An active power or cause; that which has the power to produce an effect; as, a physical, chemical, or medicinal agent; as, heat is a powerful agent.
Agony (n.) Pain so extreme as to cause writhing or contortions of the body, similar to those made in the athletic contests in Greece; and hence, extreme pain of mind or body; anguish; paroxysm of grief; specifically, the sufferings of Christ in the garden of Gethsemane.
Agora (n.) An assembly; hence, the place of assembly, especially the market place, in an ancient Greek city.
Agrom (n.) A disease occurring in Bengal and other parts of the East Indies, in which the tongue chaps and cleaves.
Aider (n.) One who, or that which, aids.
Aimer (n.) One who aims, directs, or points.
Aisle (n.) A lateral division of a building, separated from the middle part, called the nave, by a row of columns or piers, which support the roof or an upper wall containing windows, called the clearstory wall. 2. Improperly used also for the have; -- as in the phrases, a church with three aisles, the middle aisle. 3. Also (perhaps from confusion with alley), a passage into which the pews of a church open.
Alarm (n.) A summons to arms, as on the approach of an enemy. 2. Sudden surprise with fear or terror excited by apprehension of danger; in the military use, commonly, sudden apprehension of being attacked by surprise. 3. A mechanical contrivance for awaking persons from sleep, or rousing their attention; an alarum.
Album (n.) A white tablet on which anything was inscribed, as a list of names, etc. 2. A blank book, in which to insert autographs sketches, memorial writing of friends, photographs, etc.
Alder (n.) A tree, usually growing in moist land, and belonging to the genus Alnus. The wood is used by turners, etc.; the bark by dyers and tanners. In the U. S. the species of alder are usually shrubs or small trees.
Alert (n.) An alarm from a real or threatened attack; a sudden attack; also, a bugle sound to give warning.
Algol (n.) A fixed star, in Medusa's head, in the constellation Perseus, remarkable for its periodic variation in brightness.
Alibi (n.) The plea or mode of defense under which a person on trial for a crime proves or attempts to prove that he was in another place when the alleged act was committed; as, to set up an alibi; to prove an alibi.
Alien (n.) A foreigner; one owing allegiance, or belonging, to another country; a foreign-born resident of a country in which he does not possess the privileges of a citizen. Hence, a stranger. See Alienage. 2. One excluded from certain privileges; one alienated or estranged; as, aliens from God's mercies.
Allah (n.) The name of the Supreme Being, in use among the Arabs and the Mohammedans generally.
Alley (n.) A narrow passage; especially a walk or passage in a garden or park, bordered by rows of trees or bushes; a bordered way. 2. A narrow passage or way in a city, as distinct from a public street. 3. Any passage having the entrance represented as wider than the exit, so as to give the appearance of length.
Allyl (n.) An organic radical, C3H5, existing especially in oils of garlic and mustard.
Alpha (n.) The first letter in the Greek alphabet, answering to A, and hence used to denote the beginning.
Alpia (n.) The seed of canary grass (Phalaris Canariensis), used for feeding cage birds.
Altar (n.) In the Christian church, a construction of stone, wood, or other material for the celebration of the Holy Eucharist; the communion table.
Amain (n.) At full speed; in great haste; also, at once.
Amber (n.) A yellowish translucent resin resembling copal, found as a fossil in alluvial soils, with beds of lignite, or on the seashore in many places. It takes a fine polish, and is used for pipe mouthpieces, beads, etc., and as a basis for a fine varnish. By friction, it becomes strongly electric. 2. Amber color, or anything amber-colored; a clear light yellow; as, the amber of the sky. 3. The balsam, liquidambar.
Amble (n.) A peculiar gait of a horse, in which both legs on the same side are moved at the same time, alternating with the legs on the other side.
Ambry (n.) In churches, a kind of closet, niche, cupboard, or locker for utensils, vestments, etc. 2. A store closet, as a pantry, cupboard, etc.
Amess (n.) Amice, a hood or cape. See 2d Amice.
Amice (n.) A square of white linen worn at first on the head, but now about the neck and shoulders, by priests of the Roman Catholic Church while saying Mass. 2. A hood, or cape with a hood, made of lined with gray fur, formerly worn by the clergy; -- written also amess, amyss, and almuce.
Amiss (n.) A fault, wrong, or mistake.
Amity (n.) Friendship, in a general sense, between individuals, societies, or nations; friendly relations; good understanding; as, a treaty of amity and commerce; the amity of the Whigs and Tories.
Amour (n.) Love making; a love affair; usually, an unlawful connection in love; a love intrigue; an illicit love affair.
Ampul (n.) Same as Ampulla, 2.
Ampyx (n.) A woman's headband (sometimes of metal), for binding the front hair.
Amyss (n.) Same as Amice, a hood or cape.
Ancon (n.) The olecranon, or the elbow.
Angel (n.) A spiritual, celestial being, superior to man in power and intelligence. In the Scriptures the angels appear as God's messengers. 2. One of a class of ""fallen angels;"" an evil spirit; as, the devil and his angels. 3. A minister or pastor of a church, as in the Seven Asiatic churches. 4. An ancient gold coin of England, bearing the figure of the archangel Michael. It varied in value from 6s. 8d. to 10s.
Anger (n.) Trouble; vexation; also, physical pain or smart of a sore, etc. 2. A strong passion or emotion of displeasure or antagonism, excited by a real or supposed injury or insult to one's self or others, or by the intent to do such injury.
Angle (n.) The difference of direction of two lines. In the lines meet, the point of meeting is the vertex of the angle. 2. A name given to four of the twelve astrological ""houses."" 3. A fishhook; tackle for catching fish, consisting of a line, hook, and bait, with or without a rod.
Angor (n.) Great anxiety accompanied by painful constriction at the upper part of the belly, often with palpitation and oppression.
Anime (n.) A resin exuding from a tropical American tree (Hymenaea courbaril), and much used by varnish makers.
Anion (n.) An electro-negative element, or the element which, in electro-chemical decompositions, is evolved at the anode; -- opposed to cation.
Anise (n.) An umbelliferous plant (Pimpinella anisum) growing naturally in Egypt, and cultivated in Spain, Malta, etc., for its carminative and aromatic seeds.
Anker (n.) A liquid measure in various countries of Europe. The Dutch anker, formerly also used in England, contained about 10 of the old wine gallons, or 8/ imperial gallons.
Annat (n.) A half years's stipend, over and above what is owing for the incumbency, due to a minister's heirs after his decease.
Annex (n.) Something annexed or appended; as, an additional stipulation to a writing, a subsidiary building to a main building; a wing.
Annoy (n.) To disturb or irritate, especially by continued or repeated acts; to tease; to ruffle in mind; to vex; as, I was annoyed by his remarks. 2. To molest, incommode, or harm; as, to annoy an army by impeding its march, or by a cannonade. 3. A feeling of discomfort or vexation caused by what one dislikes; also, whatever causes such a feeling; as, to work annoy.
Anode (n.) The positive pole of an electric battery, or more strictly the electrode by which the current enters the electrolyte on its way to the other pole; -- opposed to cathode.
Anona (n.) A genus of tropical or subtropical plants of the natural order Anonaceae, including the soursop.
Antic (n.) An odd imagery, device, or tracery; a fantastic figure.
Anura (n. pl.) One of the orders of amphibians characterized by the absence of a tail, as the frogs and toads.
Anvil (n.) An iron block, usually with a steel face, upon which metals are hammered and shaped.
Aphis (n.) A genus of insects belonging to the order Hemiptera and family Aphidae, including numerous species known as plant lice and green flies.
Apoda (n.) A group of cirripeds, destitute of footlike organs. 2. A group of worms without appendages, as the leech.
Apple (n.) Any fruit or other vegetable production resembling, or supposed to resemble, the apple; as, apple of love, or love apple (a tomato), balsam apple, egg apple, oak apple. 2. Anything round like an apple; as, an apple of gold.
April (n.) Fig.: With reference to April being the month in which vegetation begins to put forth, the variableness of its weather, etc.
Apron (n.) An article of dress, of cloth, leather, or other stuff, worn on the fore part of the body, to keep the clothes clean, to defend them from injury, or as a covering. It is commonly tied at the waist by strings. 2. A piece of leather, or other material, to be spread before a person riding on an outside seat of a vehicle, to defend him from the rain, snow, or dust; a boot. 3. A piece of carved timber, just above the foremost end of the keel. 4. A platform, or flooring of plank, at the entrance of a dock, against which the dock gates are shut.
Apsis (n.) One of the two points of an orbit, as of a planet or satellite, which are at the greatest and least distance from the central body, corresponding to the aphelion and perihelion of a planet, or to the apogee and perigee of the moon. The more distant is called the higher apsis; the other, the lower apsis; and the line joining them, the line of apsides. 2. In a curve referred to polar coordinates, any point for which the radius vector is a maximum or minimum.
Arara (n.) The palm (or great black) cockatoo, of Australia (Microglossus aterrimus).
Arbor (n.) A kind of latticework formed of, or covered with, vines, branches of trees, or other plants, for shade; a bower. 2. A tree, as distinguished from a shrub.
Ardor (n.) Heat, in a literal sense; as, the ardor of the sun's rays. 2. Warmth or heat of passion or affection; eagerness; zeal; as, he pursues study with ardor; the fought with ardor; martial ardor.
Areca (n.) A genus of palms, one species of which produces the areca nut, or betel nut, which is chewed in India with the leaf of the Piper Betle and lime.
Arena (n.) The area in the central part of an amphitheater, in which the gladiators fought and other shows were exhibited; -- so called because it was covered with sand. 2. Any place of public contest or exertion; any sphere of action; as, the arenaof debate; the arena of life. 3. ""Sand"" or ""gravel"" in the kidneys.
Argas (n.) A genus of venomous ticks which attack men and animals. The famous Persian Argas, also called Miana bug, is A. Persicus; that of Central America, called talaje by the natives, is A. Talaje.
Argil (n.) Clay, or potter's earth; sometimes pure clay, or alumina. See Clay.
Argol (n.) Crude tartar; an acidulous salt from which cream of tartar is prepared. It exists in the juice of grapes, and is deposited from wines on the sides of the casks.
Argon (n.) A substance regarded as an element, contained in the atmosphere and remarkable for its chemical inertness.
Argot (n.) A secret language or conventional slang peculiar to thieves, tramps, and vagabonds; flash.
Argus (n.) A fabulous being of antiquity, said to have had a hundred eyes, who has placed by Juno to guard Io. His eyes were transplanted to the peacock's tail.
Aries (n.) The Ram; the first of the twelve signs in the zodiac, which the sun enters at the vernal equinox, about the 21st of March. 2. A constellation west of Taurus, drawn on the celestial globe in the figure of a ram.
Armet (n.) A kind of helmet worn in the 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries.
Armor (n.) Steel or iron covering, whether of ships or forts, protecting them from the fire of artillery.
Arnee (n.) The wild buffalo of India (Bos, or Bubalus, arni), larger than the domestic buffalo and having enormous horns.
Aroma (n.) The quality or principle of plants or other substances which constitutes their fragrance; agreeable odor; as, the aroma of coffee. 2. Fig.: The fine diffusive quality of intellectual power; flavor; as, the subtile aroma of genius.
Arpen (n.) Formerly, a measure of land in France, varying in different parts of the country. The arpent of Paris was 4,088 sq. yards, or nearly five sixths of an English acre. The woodland arpent was about 1 acre, 1 rood, 1 perch, English.
Arras (n.) Tapestry; a rich figured fabric; especially, a screen or hangings of heavy cloth with interwoven figures.
Array (n.) Order; a regular and imposing arrangement; disposition in regular lines; hence, order of battle; as, drawn up in battle array. 2. The whole body of persons thus placed in order; an orderly collection; hence, a body of soldiers. 3. A ranking or setting forth in order, by the proper officer, of a jury as impaneled in a cause. 4. To place or dispose in order, as troops for battle; to marshal. 5. To set in order, as a jury, for the trial of a cause; that is, to call them man by man.
Arret (n.) A judgment, decision, or decree of a court or high tribunal; also, a decree of a sovereign.
Arris (n.) The sharp edge or salient angle formed by two surfaces meeting each other, whether plane or curved; -- applied particularly to the edges in moldings, and to the raised edges which separate the flutings in a Doric column.
Arrow (n.) A missile weapon of offense, slender, pointed, and usually feathered and barbed, to be shot from a bow.
Arsis (n.) That part of a foot where the ictus is put, or which is distinguished from the rest (known as the thesis) of the foot by a greater stress of voice. 2. That elevation of voice now called metrical accentuation, or the rhythmic accent. 3. The elevation of the hand, or that part of the bar at which it is raised, in beating time; the weak or unaccented part of the bar; -- opposed to thesis.
Arson (n.) The malicious burning of a dwelling house or outhouse of another man, which by the common law is felony; the malicious and voluntary firing of a building or ship.
Aryan (n.) One of a primitive people supposed to have lived in prehistoric times, in Central Asia, east of the Caspian Sea, and north of the Hindoo Koosh and Paropamisan Mountains, and to have been the stock from which sprang the Hindoo, Persian, Greek, Latin, Celtic, Teutonic, Slavonic, and other races; one of that ethnological division of mankind called also Indo-European or Indo-Germanic.
Ashes (n. pl.) The earthy or mineral particles of combustible substances remaining after combustion, as of wood or coal. 2. l.) Specifically: The remains of the human body when burnt, or when ""returned to dust"" by natural decay.
Aside (n.) Something spoken aside; as, a remark made by a stageplayer which the other players are not supposed to hear.
Asper (n.) The rough breathing; a mark (/) placed over an initial vowel sound or over / to show that it is aspirated, that is, pronounced with h before it; thus ""ws, pronounced h/s, ""rh`twr, pronounced hra""t/r. 2. A Turkish money of account (formerly a coin), of little value; the 120th part of a piaster.
Aspic (n.) A European species of lavender (Lavandula spica), which produces a volatile oil. See Spike. 2. A savory meat jelly containing portions of fowl, game, fish, hard boiled eggs, etc.
Assay (n.) Examination and determination; test; as, an assay of bread or wine. 2. The act or process of ascertaining the proportion of a particular metal in an ore or alloy; especially, the determination of the proportion of gold or silver in bullion or coin.
Astel (n.) An arch, or ceiling, of boards, placed over the men's heads in a mine.
Aster (n.) A plant of the genus Callistephus. Many varieties (called China asters, German asters, etc.) are cultivated for their handsome compound flowers.
Asura (n.) An enemy of the gods, esp. one of a race of demons and giants.
Ataxy (n.) Irregularity in disease, or in the functions.
Atlas (n.) The first vertebra of the neck, articulating immediately with the skull, thus sustaining the globe of the head, whence the name. 2. A work in which subjects are exhibited in a tabular from or arrangement; as, an historical atlas. 3. A large, square folio, resembling a volume of maps; -- called also atlas folio. 4. A drawing paper of large size. See under Paper, n.
Atoll (n.) A coral island or islands, consisting of a belt of coral reef, partly submerged, surrounding a central lagoon or depression; a lagoon island.
Atony (n.) Want of tone; weakness of the system, or of any organ, especially of such as are contractile.
Attar (n.) A fragrant essential oil; esp., a volatile and highly fragrant essential oil obtained from the petals of roses.
Aubin (n.) A broken gait of a horse, between an amble and a gallop; -- commonly called a Canterbury gallop.
Auger (n.) A carpenter's tool for boring holes larger than those bored by a gimlet. It has a handle placed crosswise by which it is turned with both hands. A pod auger is one with a straight channel or groove, like the half of a bean pod. A screw auger has a twisted blade, by the spiral groove of which the chips are discharge. 2. An instrument for boring or perforating soils or rocks, for determining the quality of soils, or the nature of the rocks or strata upon which they lie, and for obtaining water.
Auget (n.) A priming tube connecting the charge chamber with the gallery, or place where the slow match is applied.
Augur (n.) An official diviner who foretold events by the singing, chattering, flight, and feeding of birds, or by signs or omens derived from celestial phenomena, certain appearances of quadrupeds, or unusual occurrences.
Aulic (n.) The ceremony observed in conferring the degree of doctor of divinity in some European universities. It begins by a harangue of the chancellor addressed to the young doctor, who then receives the cap, and presides at the disputation (also called the aulic).
Aurin (n.) A red coloring matter derived from phenol; -- called also, in commerce, yellow corallin.
Avail (n.) Profit; advantage toward success; benefit; value; as, labor, without economy, is of little avail. 2. Proceeds; as, the avails of a sale by auction.
Avena (n.) A genus of grasses, including the common oat (Avena sativa); the oat grasses.
Avens (n.) A plant of the genus Geum, esp. Geum urbanum, or herb bennet.
Avert (n.) To turn aside, or away; as, to avert the eyes from an object; to ward off, or prevent, the occurrence or effects of; as, how can the danger be averted? ""To avert his ire.""
Aviso (n.) An advice boat, or dispatch boat.
Azoth (n.) The first principle of metals, i. e., mercury, which was formerly supposed to exist in all metals, and to be extractable from them.
Azure (n.) The clear blue color of the sky; also, a pigment or dye of this color. 2. A blue color, represented in engraving by horizontal parallel lines.
Babel (n.) The city and tower in the land of Shinar, where the confusion of languages took place. 2. Hence: A place or scene of noise and confusion; a confused mixture of sounds, as of voices or languages.
Backs (n. pl.) Among leather dealers, the thickest and stoutest tanned hides.
Bacon (n.) The back and sides of a pig salted and smoked; formerly, the flesh of a pig salted or fresh.
Badge (n.) A distinctive mark, token, sign, or cognizance, worn on the person; as, the badge of a society; the badge of a policeman. 2. A carved ornament on the stern of a vessel, containing a window or the representation of one.
Bafta (n.) A coarse stuff, usually of cotton, originally made in India. Also, an imitation of this fabric made for export.
Bahar (n.) A weight used in certain parts of the East Indies, varying considerably in different localities, the range being from 223 to 625 pounds.
Balsa (n.) A raft or float, used principally on the Pacific coast of South America.
Banco (n.) A bank, especially that of Venice.
Bandy (n.) A carriage or cart used in India, esp. one drawn by bullocks.
Banns (n. pl.) Notice of a proposed marriage, proclaimed in a church, or other place prescribed by law, in order that any person may object, if he knows of just cause why the marriage should not take place.
Barde (n.) A piece of defensive (or, sometimes, ornamental) armor for a horse's neck, breast, and flanks; a barb. [Often in the pl.]
Barge (n.) A pleasure boat; a vessel or boat of state, elegantly furnished and decorated. 2. A large, roomy boat for the conveyance of passengers or goods; as, a ship's barge; a charcoal barge. 3. A double-decked passenger or freight vessel, towed by a steamboat.
Baron (n.) A title or degree of nobility; originally, the possessor of a fief, who had feudal tenants under him; in modern times, in France and Germany, a nobleman next in rank below a count; in England, a nobleman of the lowest grade in the House of Lords, being next below a viscount. 2. A husband; as, baron and feme, husband and wife.
Basan (n.) Same as Basil, a sheepskin.
Based (n.) Wearing, or protected by, bases.
Basil (n.) The slope or angle to which the cutting edge of a tool, as a plane, is ground. 2. The name given to several aromatic herbs of the Mint family, but chiefly to the common or sweet basil (Ocymum basilicum), and the bush basil, or lesser basil (O. minimum), the leaves of which are used in cookery. The name is also given to several kinds of mountain mint (Pycnanthemum).
Basin (n.) A hollow vessel or dish, to hold water for washing, and for various other uses. 2. A hollow vessel, of various forms and materials, used in the arts or manufactures, as that used by glass grinders for forming concave glasses, by hatters for molding a hat into shape, etc. 3. A hollow place containing water, as a pond, a dock for ships, a little bay. 4. A circular or oval valley, or depression of the surface of the ground, the lowest part of which is generally occupied by a lake, or traversed by a river. 5. The entire tract of country drained by a river, or sloping towards a sea or lake. 6. An isolated or circumscribed formation, particularly where the strata dip inward, on all sides, toward a center; -- especially applied to the coal formations, called coal basins or coal fields.
Basis (n.) The pedestal of a column, pillar, or statue.
Baton (n.) A staff or truncheon, used for various purposes; as, the baton of a field marshal; the baton of a conductor in musical performances. 2. An ordinary with its ends cut off, borne sinister as a mark of bastardy, and containing one fourth in breadth of the bend sinister; -- called also bastard bar. See Bend sinister.
Batta (n.) Rate of exchange; also, the discount on uncurrent coins.
Bavin (n.) A fagot of brushwood, or other light combustible matter, for kindling fires; refuse of brushwood.
Bayou (n.) An inlet from the Gulf of Mexico, from a lake, or from a large river, sometimes sluggish, sometimes without perceptible movement except from tide and wind.
Bazar (n.) In the East, an exchange, marketplace, or assemblage of shops where goods are exposed for sale. 2. A spacious hall or suite of rooms for the sale of goods, as at a fair. 3. A fair for the sale of fancy wares, toys, etc., commonly for a charitable objects.
Beach (n.) Pebbles, collectively; shingle. 2. The shore of the sea, or of a lake, which is washed by the waves; especially, a sandy or pebbly shore; the strand.
Beard (n.) The hair that grows on the chin, lips, and adjacent parts of the human face, chiefly of male adults. 2. The long hairs about the face in animals, as in the goat. 3. The appendages to the jaw in some Cetacea, and to the mouth or jaws of some fishes. 4. The byssus of certain shellfish, as the muscle. 5. The gills of some bivalves, as the oyster. 6. In insects, the hairs of the labial palpi of moths and butterflies. 7. Long or stiff hairs on a plant; the awn; as, the beard of grain. 8. A barb or sharp point of an arrow or other instrument, projecting backward to prevent the head from being easily drawn out. 9. That part of the under side of a horse's lower jaw which is above the chin, and bears the curb of a bridle.
Beast (n.) Any living creature; an animal; -- including man, insects, etc. 2. Any four-footed animal, that may be used for labor, food, or sport; as, a beast of burden. 3. Fig.: A coarse, brutal, filthy, or degraded fellow. 4. A penalty at beast, omber, etc. Hence: To be beasted, to be beaten at beast, omber, etc.
Begum (n.) In the East Indies, a princess or lady of high rank.
Being (n.) Existence, as opposed to nonexistence; state or sphere of existence. 2. That which exists in any form, whether it be material or spiritual, actual or ideal; living existence, as distinguished from a thing without life; as, a human being; spiritual beings.
Belch (n.) The act of belching; also, that which is belched; an eructation.
Belie (n.) To show to be false; to convict of, or charge with, falsehood.
Belle (n.) A young lady of superior beauty and attractions; a handsome lady, or one who attracts notice in society; a fair lady.
Belly (n.) That part of the human body which extends downward from the breast to the thighs, and contains the bowels, or intestines; the abdomen. 2. The under part of the body of animals, corresponding to the human belly. 3. The part of anything which resembles the human belly in protuberance or in cavity; the innermost part; as, the belly of a flask, muscle, sail, ship. 4. The hollow part of a curved or bent timber, the convex part of which is the back.
Bench (n.) A long seat, differing from a stool in its greater length. 2. A long table at which mechanics and other work; as, a carpenter's bench. 3. The persons who sit as judges; the court; as, the opinion of the full bench. See King's Bench. 4. A conformation like a bench; a long stretch of flat ground, or a kind of natural terrace, near a lake or river.
Benne (n.) The name of two plants (Sesamum orientale and S. indicum), originally Asiatic; -- also called oil plant. From their seeds an oil is expressed, called benne oil, used mostly for making soap. In the southern United States the seeds are used in candy.
Berme (n.) A ledge at the bottom of a bank or cutting, to catch earth that may roll down the slope, or to strengthen the bank.
Beroe (n.) A small, oval, transparent jellyfish, belonging to the Ctenophora.
Berry (n.) Any small fleshy fruit, as the strawberry, mulberry, huckleberry, etc. 2. A small fruit that is pulpy or succulent throughout, having seeds loosely imbedded in the pulp, as the currant, grape, blueberry.
Berth (n.) The place where a ship lies when she is at anchor, or at a wharf. 2. A place in a ship to sleep in; a long box or shelf on the side of a cabin or stateroom, or of a railway car, for sleeping in.
Beryl (n.) A mineral of great hardness, and, when transparent, of much beauty. It occurs in hexagonal prisms, commonly of a green or bluish green color, but also yellow, pink, and white. It is a silicate of aluminium and glucinum (beryllium). The aquamarine is a transparent, sea-green variety used as a gem. The emerald is another variety highly prized in jewelry, and distinguished by its deep color, which is probably due to the presence of a little oxide of chromium.
Betel (n.) A species of pepper (Piper betle), the leaves of which are chewed, with the areca or betel nut and a little shell lime, by the inhabitants of the East Indies. It is a woody climber with ovate many-nerved leaves.
Beton (n.) The French name for concrete; hence, concrete made after the French fashion.
Betty (n.) A name of contempt given to a man who interferes with the duties of women in a household, or who occupies himself with womanish matters. 2. A pear-shaped bottle covered round with straw, in which olive oil is sometimes brought from Italy; -- called by chemists a Florence flask.
Bevel (n.) Any angle other than a right angle; the angle which one surface makes with another when they are not at right angles; the slant or inclination of such surface; as, to give a bevel to the edge of a table or a stone slab; the bevel of a piece of timber. 2. An instrument consisting of two rules or arms, jointed together at one end, and opening to any angle, for adjusting the surfaces of work to the same or a given inclination; -- called also a bevel square.
Bezel (n.) The rim which encompasses and fastens a jewel or other object, as the crystal of a watch, in the cavity in which it is set.
Bhang (n.) An astringent and narcotic drug made from the dried leaves and seed capsules of wild hemp (Cannabis Indica), and chewed or smoked in the East as a means of intoxication. See Hasheesh.
Bible (n.) The Book by way of eminence, -- that is, the book which is made up of the writings accepted by Christians as of divine origin and authority, whether such writings be in the original language, or translated; the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments; -- sometimes in a restricted sense, the Old Testament; as, King James's Bible; Douay Bible; Luther's Bible. Also, the book which is made up of writings similarly accepted by the Jews; as, a rabbinical Bible. 2. A book containing the sacred writings belonging to any religion; as, the Koran is often called the Mohammedan Bible. 3. A book with an authoritative exposition of some topic, respected by many who are experts in the field.
Bigha (n.) A measure of land in India, varying from a third of an acre to an acre.
Bigot (n.) A hypocrite; esp., a superstitious hypocrite. 2. A person who regards his own faith and views in matters of religion as unquestionably right, and any belief or opinion opposed to or differing from them as unreasonable or wicked. In an extended sense, a person who is intolerant of opinions which conflict with his own, as in politics or morals; one obstinately and blindly devoted to his own church, party, belief, or opinion.
Bilbo (n.) A rapier; a sword; so named from Bilbao, in Spain. 2. A long bar or bolt of iron with sliding shackles, and a lock at the end, to confine the feet of prisoners or offenders, esp. on board of ships.
Bilge (n.) The protuberant part of a cask, which is usually in the middle. 2. That part of a ship's hull or bottom which is broadest and most nearly flat, and on which she would rest if aground.
Billy (n.) A club; esp., a policeman's club.
Binny (n.) A large species of barbel (Barbus bynni), found in the Nile, and much esteemed for food.
Biped (n.) A two-footed animal, as man.
Birch (n.) A tree of several species, constituting the genus Betula; as, the white or common birch (B. alba) (also called silver birch and lady birch); the dwarf birch (B. glandulosa); the paper or canoe birch (B. papyracea); the yellow birch (B. lutea); the black or cherry birch (B. lenta). 2. A birch twig or birch twigs, used for flogging.
Birth (n.) The act or fact of coming into life, or of being born; -- generally applied to human beings; as, the birth of a son. 2. Lineage; extraction; descent; sometimes, high birth; noble extraction. 3. The act of bringing forth; as, she had two children at a birth. 4. That which is born; that which is produced, whether animal or vegetable. 5. Origin; beginning; as, the birth of an empire.
Bison (n.) The American bison buffalo (Bison Americanus), a large, gregarious bovine quadruped with shaggy mane and short black horns, which formerly roamed in herds over most of the temperate portion of North America, but is now restricted to very limited districts in the region of the Rocky Mountains, and is rapidly decreasing in numbers.
Bitch (n.) The female of the canine kind, as of the dog, wolf, and fox. 2. An opprobrious name for a woman, especially a lewd woman.
Biter (n.) One who, or that which, bites; that which bites often, or is inclined to bite, as a dog or fish.
Bitts (n. pl.) A frame of two strong timbers fixed perpendicularly in the fore part of a ship, on which to fasten the cables as the ship rides at anchor, or in warping. Other bitts are used for belaying (belaying bitts), for sustaining the windlass (carrick bitts, winch bitts, or windlass bitts), to hold the pawls of the windlass (pawl bitts) etc.
Bizet (n.) The upper faceted portion of a brilliant-cut diamond, which projects from the setting and occupies the zone between the girdle and the table. See Brilliant, n.
Black (n.) That which is destitute of light or whiteness; the darkest color, or rather a destitution of all color; as, a cloth has a good black. 2. A negro; a person whose skin is of a black color, or shaded with black; esp. a member or descendant of certain African races. 3. A black garment or dress; as, she wears black
Blade (n.) Properly, the leaf, or flat part of the leaf, of any plant, especially of gramineous plants. The term is sometimes applied to the spire of grasses. 2. The cutting part of an instrument; as, the blade of a knife or a sword. 3. The broad part of an oar; also, one of the projecting arms of a screw propeller. 4. The four large shell plates on the sides, and the five large ones of the middle, of the carapace of the sea turtle, which yield the best tortoise shell. 5. A sharp-witted, dashing, wild, or reckless, fellow; -- a word of somewhat indefinite meaning.
Blain (n.) An inflammatory swelling or sore; a bulla, pustule, or blister. 2. A bladder growing on the root of the tongue of a horse, against the windpipe, and stopping the breath.
Blank (n.) Any void space; a void space on paper, or in any written instrument; an interval void of consciousness, action, result, etc; a void. 2. A paper unwritten; a paper without marks or characters a blank ballot; -- especially, a paper on which are to be inserted designated items of information, for which spaces are left vacant; a bland form. 3. A paper containing the substance of a legal instrument, as a deed, release, writ, or execution, with spaces left to be filled with names, date, descriptions, etc. 4. The point aimed at in a target, marked with a white spot; hence, the object to which anything is directed. 5. A kind of base silver money, first coined in England by Henry V., and worth about 8 pence; also, a French coin of the seventeenth century, worth about 4 pence. 6. A piece of metal prepared to be made into something by a further operation, as a coin, screw, nuts. 7. A piece or division of a piece, without spots; as, the ""double blank""; the ""six blank.""
Blare (n.) The harsh noise of a trumpet; a loud and somewhat harsh noise, like the blast of a trumpet; a roar or bellowing.
Blast (n.) A forcible stream of air from an orifice, as from a bellows, the mouth, etc. Hence: The continuous blowing to which one charge of ore or metal is subjected in a furnace; as, to melt so many tons of iron at a blast. 2. The exhaust steam from and engine, driving a column of air out of a boiler chimney, and thus creating an intense draught through the fire; also, any draught produced by the blast. 3. The sound made by blowing a wind instrument; strictly, the sound produces at one breath. 4. A sudden, pernicious effect, as if by a noxious wind, especially on animals and plants; a blight. 5. The act of rending, or attempting to rend, heavy masses of rock, earth, etc., by the explosion of gunpowder, dynamite, etc.; also, the charge used for this purpose.
Blaze (n.) Intense, direct light accompanied with heat; as, to seek shelter from the blaze of the sun. 2. A bursting out, or active display of any quality; an outburst; a brilliant display. 3. A spot made on trees by chipping off a piece of the bark, usually as a surveyor's mark.
Bleat (n.) A plaintive cry of, or like that of, a sheep.
Blend (n.) A thorough mixture of one thing with another, as color, tint, etc., into another, so that it cannot be known where one ends or the other begins.
Blind (n.) Something to mislead the eye or the understanding, or to conceal some covert deed or design; a subterfuge.
Bliss (n.) Orig., blithesomeness; gladness; now, the highest degree of happiness; blessedness; exalted felicity; heavenly joy.
Bloat (n.) A term of contempt for a worthless, dissipated fellow.
Block (n.) To obstruct so as to prevent passage or progress; to prevent passage from, through, or into, by obstructing the way; -- used both of persons and things; -- often followed by up; as, to block up a road or harbor. 2. To secure or support by means of blocks; to secure, as two boards at their angles of intersection, by pieces of wood glued to each. 3. To shape on, or stamp with, a block; as, to block a hat.
Blood (n.) The fluid which circulates in the principal vascular system of animals, carrying nourishment to all parts of the body, and bringing away waste products to be excreted. See under Arterial. 2. Descent; lineage; especially, honorable birth; the highest royal lineage. 3. The shedding of blood; the taking of life, murder; manslaughter; destruction. 4. A man of fire or spirit; a fiery spark; a gay, showy man; a rake. 5. The juice of anything, especially if red.
Bloom (n.) A blossom; the flower of a plant; an expanded bud; flowers, collectively. 2. The opening of flowers in general; the state of blossoming or of having the flowers open; as, the cherry trees are in bloom. 3. A state or time of beauty, freshness, and vigor; an opening to higher perfection, analogous to that of buds into blossoms; as, the bloom of youth. 4. The delicate, powdery coating upon certain growing or newly-gathered fruits or leaves, as on grapes, plums, etc. Hence: Anything giving an appearance of attractive freshness; a flush; a glow. 5. A popular term for a bright-hued variety of some minerals; as, the rose-red cobalt bloom. 6. A mass of wrought iron from the Catalan forge or from the puddling furnace, deprived of its dross, and shaped usually in the form of an oblong block by shingling. 7. A large bar of steel formed directly from an ingot by hammering or rolling, being a preliminary shape for further working.
Bluff (n.) A high, steep bank, as by a river or the sea, or beside a ravine or plain; a cliff with a broad face. 2. An act of bluffing; an expression of self-confidence for the purpose of intimidation; braggadocio; as, that is only bluff, or a bluff.
Blush (n.) A suffusion of the cheeks or face with red, as from a sense of shame, confusion, or modesty.
Board (n.) A piece of timber sawed thin, and of considerable length and breadth as compared with the thickness, -- used for building, etc. 2. Hence: What is served on a table as food; stated meals; provision; entertainment; -- usually as furnished for pay; as, to work for one's board; the price of board. 3. A table at which a council or court is held. Hence: A council, convened for business, or any authorized assembly or meeting, public or private; a number of persons appointed or elected to sit in council for the management or direction of some public or private business or trust; as, the Board of Admiralty; a board of trade; a board of directors, trustees, commissioners, etc. 4. A square or oblong piece of thin wood or other material used for some special purpose, as, a molding board; a board or surface painted or arranged for a game; as, a chessboard; a backgammon board. 5. Paper made thick and stiff like a board, for book covers, etc.; pasteboard; as, to bind a book in boards. 6. The stage in a theater; as, to go upon the boards, to enter upon the theatrical profession. 7. To go on board of, or enter, as a ship, whether in a hostile or a friendly way. 8. To enter, as a railway car. 9. To furnish with regular meals, or with meals and lodgings, for compensation; to supply with daily meals. 10. To place at board, for compensation; as, to board one's horse at a livery stable.
Boast (n.) The cause of boasting; occasion of pride or exultation, -- sometimes of laudable pride or exultation.
Bobby (n.) A nickname for a policeman; -- from Sir Robert Peel, who remodeled the police force. See Peeler.
Bocal (n.) A cylindrical glass vessel, with a large and short neck.
Bogie (n.) A four-wheeled truck, having a certain amount of play around a vertical axis, used to support in part a locomotive on a railway track.
Bohea (n.) Bohea tea, an inferior kind of black tea. See under Tea.
Bolas (n. sing. & pl.) A kind of missile weapon consisting of one, two, or more balls of stone, iron, or other material, attached to the ends of a leather cord; -- used by the Gauchos of South America, and others, for hurling at and entangling an animal.
Boldu (n.) A fragrant evergreen shrub of Chili (Peumus Boldus). The bark is used in tanning, the wood for making charcoal, the leaves in medicine, and the drupes are eaten.
Bolis (n.) A meteor or brilliant shooting star, followed by a train of light or sparks; esp. one which explodes.
Bolus (n.) A rounded mass of anything, esp. a large pill.
Bonny (n.) A round and compact bed of ore, or a distinct bed, not communicating with a vein.
Bonus (n.) A premium given for a loan, or for a charter or other privilege granted to a company; as the bank paid a bonus for its charter. 2. An extra dividend to the shareholders of a joint stock company, out of accumulated profits.
Bonze (n.) A Buddhist or Fohist priest, monk, or nun.
Booby (n.) A swimming bird (Sula fiber or S. sula) related to the common gannet, and found in the West Indies, nesting on the bare rocks. It is so called on account of its apparent stupidity. The name is also sometimes applied to other species of gannets; as, S. piscator, the red-footed booby.
Booly (n.) A company of Irish herdsmen, or a single herdsman, wandering from place to place with flocks and herds, and living on their milk, like the Tartars; also, a place in the mountain pastures inclosed for the shelter of cattle or their keepers.
Boose (n.) A stall or a crib for an ox, cow, or other animal.
Boost (n.) A push from behind, as to one who is endeavoring to climb; help.
Booth (n.) A house or shed built of boards, boughs, or other slight materials, for temporary occupation. 2. A covered stall or temporary structure in a fair or market, or at a polling place.
Boots (n.) A servant at a hotel or elsewhere, who cleans and blacks the boots and shoes.
Booty (n.) That which is seized by violence or obtained by robbery, especially collective spoil taken in war; plunder; pillage.
Borax (n.) A white or gray crystalline salt, with a slight alkaline taste, used as a flux, in soldering metals, making enamels, fixing colors on porcelain, and as a soap. It occurs native in certain mineral springs, and is made from the boric acid of hot springs in Tuscany. It was originally obtained from a lake in Thibet, and was sent to Europe under the name of tincal. Borax is a pyroborate or tetraborate of sodium, Na2B4O7.10H2O.
Borer (n.) A marine, bivalve mollusk, of the genus Teredo and allies, which burrows in wood. See Teredo. 2. Any bivalve mollusk (Saxicava, Lithodomus, etc.) which bores into limestone and similar substances. 3. One of the larvae of many species of insects, which penetrate trees, as the apple, peach, pine, etc. See Apple borer, under Apple.
Boron (n.) A nonmetallic element occurring abundantly in borax. It is reduced with difficulty to the free state, when it can be obtained in several different forms; viz., as a substance of a deep olive color, in a semimetallic form, and in colorless quadratic crystals similar to the diamond in hardness and other properties. It occurs in nature also in boracite, datolite, tourmaline, and some other minerals. Atomic weight 10.9. Symbol B.
Bosom (n.) The breast of a human being; the part, between the arms, to which anything is pressed when embraced by them. 2. The breast, considered as the seat of the passions, affections, and operations of the mind; consciousness; secret thoughts. 3. Any thing or place resembling the breast; a supporting surface; an inner recess; the interior; as, the bosom of the earth. 4. The part of the dress worn upon the breast; an article, or a portion of an article, of dress to be worn upon the breast; as, the bosom of a shirt; a linen bosom.
Botch (n.) A patch put on, or a part of a garment patched or mended in a clumsy manner. 2. Work done in a bungling manner; a clumsy performance; a piece of work, or a place in work, marred in the doing, or not properly finished; a bungle. 3. To mark with, or as with, botches. 4. To repair; to mend; esp. to patch in a clumsy or imperfect manner, as a garment; -- sometimes with up. 5. To put together unsuitably or unskillfully; to express or perform in a bungling manner; to spoil or mar, as by unskillful work.
Bouge (n.) Bouche (see Bouche, 2); food and drink; provisions.
Bough (n.) An arm or branch of a tree, esp. a large arm or main branch.
Bound (n.) The external or limiting line, either real or imaginary, of any object or space; that which limits or restrains, or within which something is limited or restrained; limit; confine; extent; boundary. 2. Rebound; as, the bound of a ball.
Bouse (n.) Drink, esp. alcoholic drink; also, a carouse; a booze.
Bowel (n.) One of the intestines of an animal; an entrail, especially of man; a gut; -- generally used in the plural. 2. Hence, figuratively: The interior part of anything; as, the bowels of the earth.
Bower (n.) Anciently, a chamber; a lodging room; esp., a lady's private apartment. 2. A rustic cottage or abode; poetically, an attractive abode or retreat. 3. A shelter or covered place in a garden, made with boughs of trees or vines, etc., twined together; an arbor; a shady recess. 4. A young hawk, when it begins to leave the nest.
Bowls (n. pl.) See Bowl, a ball, a game.
Boyau (n.) A winding or zigzag trench forming a path or communication from one siegework to another, to a magazine, etc.
Brace (n.) A cord, ligament, or rod, for producing or maintaining tension, as a cord on the side of a drum. 2. A piece of material used to transmit, or change the direction of, weight or pressure; any one of the pieces, in a frame or truss, which divide the structure into triangular parts. It may act as a tie, or as a strut, and serves to prevent distortion of the structure, and transverse strains in its members. A boiler brace is a diagonal stay, connecting the head with the shell. 3. A vertical curved line connecting two or more words or lines, which are to be taken together; thus, boll, bowl; or, in music, used to connect staves. 4. A rope reeved through a block at the end of a yard, by which the yard is moved horizontally; also, a rudder gudgeon. 5. A curved instrument or handle of iron or wood, for holding and turning bits, etc.; a bitstock. 6. A pair; a couple; as, a brace of ducks; now rarely applied to persons, except familiarly or with some contempt.
Bract (n.) A leaf, usually smaller than the true leaves of a plant, from the axil of which a flower stalk arises. 2. Any modified leaf, or scale, on a flower stalk or at the base of a flower.
Braid (n.) A plait, band, or narrow fabric formed by intertwining or weaving together different strands. 2. A narrow fabric, as of wool, silk, or linen, used for binding, trimming, or ornamenting dresses, etc.
Brail (n.) Ropes passing through pulleys, and used to haul in or up the leeches, bottoms, or corners of sails, preparatory to furling.
Brain (n.) The whitish mass of soft matter (the center of the nervous system, and the seat of consciousness and volition) which is inclosed in the cartilaginous or bony cranium of vertebrate animals. It is simply the anterior termination of the spinal cord, and is developed from three embryonic vesicles, whose cavities are connected with the central canal of the cord; the cavities of the vesicles become the central cavities, or ventricles, and the walls thicken unequally and become the three segments, the fore-, mid-, and hind-brain. 2. The organ or seat of intellect; hence, the understanding.
Brake (n.) A fern of the genus Pteris, esp. the P. aquilina, common in almost all countries. It has solitary stems dividing into three principal branches. Less properly: Any fern. 2. A thicket; a place overgrown with shrubs and brambles, with undergrowth and ferns, or with canes.
Brash (n.) Refuse boughs of trees; also, the clippings of hedges.
Brass (n.) An alloy (usually yellow) of copper and zinc, in variable proportion, but often containing two parts of copper to one part of zinc. It sometimes contains tin, and rarely other metals. 2. A journal bearing, so called because frequently made of brass. A brass is often lined with a softer metal, when the latter is generally called a white metal lining. See Axle box, Journal Box, and Bearing. 3. Coin made of copper, brass, or bronze. 4. Utensils, ornaments, or other articles of brass. 5. A brass plate engraved with a figure or device. Specifically, one used as a memorial to the dead, and generally having the portrait, coat of arms, etc. 6. Lumps of pyrites or sulphuret of iron, the color of which is near to that of brass.
Brave (n.) Specifically, an Indian warrior.
Brawl (n.) A noisy quarrel; loud, angry contention; a wrangle; a tumult; as, a drunken brawl.
Brawn (n.) Full, strong muscles, esp. of the arm or leg, muscular strength; a protuberant muscular part of the body; sometimes, the arm. 2. The flesh of a boar; also, the salted and prepared flesh of a boar.
Braxy (n.) A diseased sheep, or its mutton.
Bread (n.) An article of food made from flour or meal by moistening, kneading, and baking. 2. Food; sustenance; support of life, in general.
Bream (n.) A European fresh-water cyprinoid fish of the genus Abramis, little valued as food. Several species are known. 2. An American fresh-water fish, of various species of Pomotis and allied genera, which are also called sunfishes and pondfishes. See Pondfish. 3. A marine sparoid fish of the genus Pagellus, and allied genera. See Sea Bream.
Breed (n.) A race or variety of men or other animals (or of plants), perpetuating its special or distinctive characteristics by inheritance. 2. Class; sort; kind; -- of men, things, or qualities.
Breve (n.) A note or character of time, equivalent to two semibreves or four minims. When dotted, it is equal to three semibreves. It was formerly of a square figure (as thus: / ), but is now made oval, with a line perpendicular to the staff on each of its sides; -- formerly much used for choir service. 2. Any writ or precept under seal, issued out of any court. 3. The great ant thrush of Sumatra (Pitta gigas), which has a very short tail.
Bribe (n.) A price, reward, gift, or favor bestowed or promised with a view to prevent the judgment or corrupt the conduct of a judge, witness, voter, or other person in a position of trust.
Brick (n.) A block or clay tempered with water, sand, etc., molded into a regular form, usually rectangular, and sun-dried, or burnt in a kiln, or in a heap or stack called a clamp. 2. Bricks, collectively, as designating that kind of material; as, a load of brick; a thousand of brick. 3. Any oblong rectangular mass; as, a brick of maple sugar; a penny brick (of bread). 4. A good fellow; a merry person; as, you 're a brick.
Bride (n.) A woman newly married, or about to be married.
Brief (n.) A writ issuing from the chancery, directed to any judge ordinary, commanding and authorizing that judge to call a jury to inquire into the case, and upon their verdict to pronounce sentence. 2. A letter patent, from proper authority, authorizing a collection or charitable contribution of money in churches, for any public or private purpose.
Briar (n.) A plant with a slender woody stem bearing stout prickles; especially, species of Rosa, Rubus, and Smilax.
Brill (n.) A fish allied to the turbot (Rhombus levis), much esteemed in England for food; -- called also bret, pearl, prill. See Bret.
Brine (n.) Water saturated or strongly impregnated with salt; pickle; hence, any strong saline solution; also, the saline residue or strong mother liquor resulting from the evaporation of natural or artificial waters. 2. The ocean; the water of an ocean, sea, or salt lake.
Brink (n.) The edge, margin, or border of a steep place, as of a precipice; a bank or edge, as of a river or pit; a verge; a border; as, the brink of a chasm. Also Fig.
Britt (n.) The young of the common herring; also, a small species of herring; the sprat.
Broad (n.) The broad part of anything; as, the broad of an oar.
Broil (n.) A tumult; a noisy quarrel; a disturbance; a brawl; contention; discord, either between individuals or in the state.
Broma (n.) A light form of prepared cocoa (or cacao), or the drink made from it.
Broom (n.) A plant having twigs suitable for making brooms to sweep with when bound together; esp., the Cytisus scoparius of Western Europe, which is a low shrub with long, straight, green, angular branches, minute leaves, and large yellow flowers. 2. An implement for sweeping floors, etc., commonly made of the panicles or tops of broom corn, bound together or attached to a long wooden handle; -- so called because originally made of the twigs of the broom.
Brose (n.) Pottage made by pouring some boiling liquid on meal (esp. oatmeal), and stirring it. It is called beef brose, water brose, etc., according to the name of the liquid (beef broth, hot water, etc.) used.
Broth (n.) Liquid in which flesh (and sometimes other substances, as barley or rice) has been boiled; thin or simple soup.
Brown (n.) A dark color inclining to red or yellow, resulting from the mixture of red and black, or of red, black, and yellow; a tawny, dusky hue.
Bruit (n.) An abnormal sound of several kinds, heard on auscultation.
Brush (n.) An instrument composed of bristles, or other like material, set in a suitable back or handle, as of wood, bone, or ivory, and used for various purposes, as in removing dust from clothes, laying on colors, etc. Brushes have different shapes and names according to their use; as, clothes brush, paint brush, tooth brush, etc. 2. A bundle of flexible wires or thin plates of metal, used to conduct an electrical current to or from the commutator of a dynamo, electric motor, or similar apparatus. 3. The act of brushing; as, to give one's clothes a brush; a rubbing or grazing with a quick motion; a light touch; as, we got a brush from the wheel as it passed. 4. A skirmish; a slight encounter; a shock or collision; as, to have a brush with an enemy. 5. A short contest, or trial, of speed. 6. To apply a brush to, according to its particular use; to rub, smooth, clean, paint, etc., with a brush. 7. To touch in passing, or to pass lightly over, as with a brush. 8. To remove or gather by brushing, or by an act like that of brushing, or by passing lightly over, as wind; -- commonly with off.
Buchu (n.) A South African shrub (Barosma) with small leaves that are dotted with oil glands; also, the leaves themselves, which are used in medicine for diseases of the urinary organs, etc. Several species furnish the leaves.
Budge (n.) A kind of fur prepared from lambskin dressed with the wool on; -- used formerly as an edging and ornament, esp. of scholastic habits.
Buggy (n.) A light, four-wheeled vehicle, usually with one seat, and with or without a calash top.
Bugle (n.) A copper instrument of the horn quality of tone, shorter and more conical that the trumpet, sometimes keyed; formerly much used in military bands, very rarely in the orchestra; now superseded by the cornet; -- called also the Kent bugle. 2. An elongated glass bead, of various colors, though commonly black. 3. A plant of the genus Ajuga of the Mint family, a native of the Old World.
Build (n.) Form or mode of construction; general figure; make; as, the build of a ship.
Built (n.) Shape; build; form of structure; as, the built of a ship.
Bulau (n.) An East Indian insectivorous mammal (Gymnura Rafflesii), somewhat like a rat in appearance, but allied to the hedgehog.
Bulge (n.) A swelling, protuberant part; a bending outward, esp. when caused by pressure; as, a bulge in a wall. 2. The bilge of a vessel. See Bilge, 2.
Bulla (n.) A bleb; a vesicle, or an elevation of the cuticle, containing a transparent watery fluid. 2. The ovoid prominence below the opening of the ear in the skulls of many animals; as, the tympanic or auditory bulla. 3. A leaden seal for a document; esp. the round leaden seal attached to the papal bulls, which has on one side a representation of St. Peter and St. Paul, and on the other the name of the pope who uses it.
Bully (n.) A noisy, blustering fellow, more insolent than courageous; one who is threatening and quarrelsome; an insolent, tyrannical fellow. 2. A brisk, dashing fellow.
Bulse (n.) A purse or bag in which to carry or measure diamonds, etc.
Bunch (n.) A collection, cluster, or tuft, properly of things of the same kind, growing or fastened together; as, a bunch of grapes; a bunch of keys. 2. A small isolated mass of ore, as distinguished from a continuous vein.
Bungo (n.) A kind of canoe used in Central and South America; also, a kind of boat used in the Southern United States.
Bunko (n.) A kind of swindling game or scheme, by means of cards or by a sham lottery.
Burgh (n.) A borough or incorporated town, especially, one in Scotland. See Borough.
Burin (n.) The cutting tool of an engraver on metal, used in line engraving. It is made of tempered steel, one end being ground off obliquely so as to produce a sharp point, and the other end inserted in a handle; a graver; also, the similarly shaped tool used by workers in marble. 2. The manner or style of execution of an engraver; as, a soft burin; a brilliant burin.
Bursa (n.) Any sac or saclike cavity; especially, one of the synovial sacs, or small spaces, often lined with synovial membrane, interposed between tendons and bony prominences.
Burse (n.) A purse; also, a vesicle; a pod; a hull. 2. A fund or foundation for the maintenance of needy scholars in their studies; also, the sum given to the beneficiaries. 3. An exchange, for merchants and bankers, in the cities of continental Europe. Same as Bourse.
Burst (n.) A sudden breaking forth; a violent rending; an explosion; as, a burst of thunder; a burst of applause; a burst of passion; a burst of inspiration. 2. Any brief, violent exertion or effort; a spurt; as, a burst of speed. 3. A sudden opening, as of landscape; a stretch; an expanse.
Busby (n.) A military headdress or cap, used in the British army. It is of fur, with a bag, of the same color as the facings of the regiment, hanging from the top over the right shoulder.
Butte (n.) A detached low mountain, or high rising abruptly from the general level of the surrounding plain; -- applied to peculiar elevations in the Rocky Mountain region.
Butty (n.) One who mines by contract, at so much per ton of coal or ore.
Butyl (n.) A compound radical, regarded as butane, less one atom of hydrogen.
Byard (n.) A piece of leather crossing the breast, used by the men who drag sledges in coal mines.
Byway (n.) A secluded, private, or obscure way; a path or road aside from the main one.
Caaba (n.) The small and nearly cubical stone building, toward which all Mohammedans must pray.
Cabal (n.) A number of persons united in some close design, usually to promote their private views and interests in church or state by intrigue; a secret association composed of a few designing persons; a junto.
Cabas (n.) A flat basket or frail for figs, etc.; hence, a lady's flat workbasket, reticule, or hand bag; -- often written caba.
Cable (n.) A large, strong rope or chain, of considerable length, used to retain a vessel at anchor, and for other purposes. It is made of hemp, of steel wire, or of iron links. 2. A rope of steel wire, or copper wire, usually covered with some protecting or insulating substance; as, the cable of a suspension bridge; a telegraphic cable. 3. A molding, shaft of a column, or any other member of convex, rounded section, made to resemble the spiral twist of a rope; -- called also cable molding.
Cabob (n.) A leg of mutton roasted, stuffed with white herrings and sweet herbs.
Cacao (n.) A small evergreen tree (Theobroma Cacao) of South America and the West Indies. Its fruit contains an edible pulp, inclosing seeds about the size of an almond, from which cocoa, chocolate, and broma are prepared.
Cache (n.) A hole in the ground, or hiding place, for concealing and preserving provisions which it is inconvenient to carry.
Caddy (n.) A small box, can, or chest to keep tea in.
Cadet (n.) A gentleman who carries arms in a regiment, as a volunteer, with a view of acquiring military skill and obtaining a commission. 2. A young man in training for military or naval service; esp. a pupil in a military or naval school, as at West Point, Annapolis, or Woolwich.
Cagit (n.) A kind of parrot, of a beautiful green color, found in the Philippine Islands.
Cagot (n.) One of a race inhabiting the valleys of the Pyrenees, who until 1793 were political and social outcasts (Christian Pariahs). They are supposed to be a remnant of the Visigoths.
Cairn (n.) A rounded or conical heap of stones erected by early inhabitants of the British Isles, apparently as a sepulchral monument. 2. A pile of stones heaped up as a landmark, or to arrest attention, as in surveying, or in leaving traces of an exploring party, etc.
Calin (n.) An alloy of lead and tin, of which the Chinese make tea canisters.
Calla (n.) A genus of plants, of the order Araceae.
Calyx (n.) A cuplike division of the pelvis of the kidney, which surrounds one or more of the renal papillae.
Camel (n.) A large ruminant used in Asia and Africa for carrying burdens and for riding. The camel is remarkable for its ability to go a long time without drinking. Its hoofs are small, and situated at the extremities of the toes, and the weight of the animal rests on the callous. The dromedary (Camelus dromedarius) has one bunch on the back, while the Bactrian camel (C. Bactrianus) has two. The llama, alpaca, and vicua, of South America, belong to a related genus (Auchenia). 2. A water-tight structure (as a large box or boxes) used to assist a vessel in passing over a shoal or bar or in navigating shallow water. By admitting water, the camel or camels may be sunk and attached beneath or at the sides of a vessel, and when the water is pumped out the vessel is lifted.
Cameo (n.) A carving in relief, esp. one on a small scale used as a jewel for personal adornment, or like.
Camis (n.) A light, loose dress or robe.
Canal (n.) An artificial channel filled with water and designed for navigation, or for irrigating land, etc. 2. A tube or duct; as, the alimentary canal; the semicircular canals of the ear.
Candy (n.) A weight, at Madras 500 pounds, at Bombay 560 pounds.
Canis (n.) A genus of carnivorous mammals, of the family Canidae, including the dogs and wolves.
Canna (n.) A measure of length in Italy, varying from six to seven feet. See Cane, 4. 2. A genus of tropical plants, with large leaves and often with showy flowers. The Indian shot (C. Indica) is found in gardens of the northern United States.
Canoe (n.) A boat used by rude nations, formed of trunk of a tree, excavated, by cutting of burning, into a suitable shape. It is propelled by a paddle or paddles, or sometimes by sail, and has no rudder. 2. A boat made of bark or skins, used by savages. 3. A light pleasure boat, especially designed for use by one who goes alone upon long excursions, including portage. It it propelled by a paddle, or by a small sail attached to a temporary mast.
Canon (n.) A law, or rule of doctrine or discipline, enacted by a council and confirmed by the pope or the sovereign; a decision, regulation, code, or constitution made by ecclesiastical authority. 2. The collection of books received as genuine Holy Scriptures, called the sacred canon, or general rule of moral and religious duty, given by inspiration; the Bible; also, any one of the canonical Scriptures. See Canonical books, under Canonical, a. 3. In monasteries, a book containing the rules of a religious order. 4. A musical composition in which the voices begin one after another, at regular intervals, successively taking up the same subject. It either winds up with a coda (tailpiece), or, as each voice finishes, commences anew, thus forming a perpetual fugue or round. It is the strictest form of imitation. See Imitation.
Canto (n.) The highest vocal part; the air or melody in choral music; anciently the tenor, now the soprano.
Capel (n.) A composite stone (quartz, schorl, and hornblende) in the walls of tin and copper lodes.
Caper (n.) A frolicsome leap or spring; a skip; a jump, as in mirth or dancing; a prank. 2. A vessel formerly used by the Dutch, privateer. 3. The pungent grayish green flower bud of the European and Oriental caper (Capparis spinosa), much used for pickles. 4. A plant of the genus Capparis; -- called also caper bush, caper tree.
Capoc (n.) A sort of cotton so short and fine that it can not be spun, used in the East Indies to line palanquins, to make mattresses, etc.
Capon (n.) A castrated cock, esp. when fattened; a male chicken gelded to improve his flesh for the table.
Capra (n.) A genus of ruminants, including the common goat.
Caput (n.) The head; also, a knoblike protuberance or capitulum.
Caret (n.) A mark [^] used by writers and proof readers to indicate that something is interlined above, or inserted in the margin, which belongs in the place marked by the caret.
Cargo (n.) The lading or freight of a ship or other vessel; the goods, merchandise, or whatever is conveyed in a vessel or boat; load; freight.
Carib (n.) A native of the Caribbee islands or the coasts of the Caribbean sea; esp., one of a tribe of Indians inhabiting a region of South America, north of the Amazon, and formerly most of the West India islands.
Carob (n.) One of the long, sweet, succulent, pods of the carob tree, which are used as food for animals and sometimes eaten by man; -- called also St. John's bread, carob bean, and algaroba bean.
Carol (n.) A song of joy, exultation, or mirth; a lay. 2. A song of praise of devotion; as, a Christmas or Easter carol. 3. Joyful music, as of a song.
Carry (n.) A tract of land, over which boats or goods are carried between two bodies of navigable water; a carrying place; a portage.
Carse (n.) Low, fertile land; a river valley.
Catch (n.) That by which anything is caught or temporarily fastened; as, the catch of a gate. 2. The posture of seizing; a state of preparation to lay hold of, or of watching he opportunity to seize; as, to lie on the catch. 3. That which is caught or taken; profit; gain; especially, the whole quantity caught or taken at one time; as, a good catch of fish. 4. Something desirable to be caught, esp. a husband or wife in matrimony. 5. A humorous canon or round, so contrived that the singers catch up each other's words.
Catel (n.) Property; -- often used by Chaucer in contrast with rent, or income.
Cater (n.) To provide food; to buy, procure, or prepare provisions. 2. By extension: To supply what is needed or desired, at theatrical or musical entertainments; -- followed by for or to.
Cates (n.) Provisions; food; viands; especially, luxurious food; delicacies; dainties.
Cauma (n.) Great heat, as of the body in fever.
Cause (n.) To effect as an agent; to produce; to be the occasion of; to bring about; to bring into existence; to make; -- usually followed by an infinitive, sometimes by that with a finite verb.
Cavin (n.) A hollow way, adapted to cover troops, and facilitate their aproach to a place.
Cella (n.) The part inclosed within the walls of an ancient temple, as distinguished from the open porticoes.
Cense (n.) A census; -- also, a public rate or tax.
Ceres (n.) The daughter of Saturn and Ops or Rhea, the goddess of corn and tillage.
Ceryl (n.) A radical, C27H55 supposed to exist in several compounds obtained from Chinese wax, beeswax, etc.
Cetin (n.) A white, waxy substance, forming the essential part of spermaceti.
Cetyl (n.) A radical, C16H33, not yet isolated, but supposed to exist in a series of compounds homologous with the ethyl compounds, and derived from spermaceti.
Chace (n.) See 3d Chase, n., 3.
Chaff (n.) The glumes or husks of grains and grasses separated from the seed by threshing and winnowing, etc. 2. The scales or bracts on the receptacle, which subtend each flower in the heads of many Compositae, as the sunflower.
Chain (n.) A series of links or rings, usually of metal, connected, or fitted into one another, used for various purposes, as of support, of restraint, of ornament, of the exertion and transmission of mechanical power, etc. 2. That which confines, fetters, or secures, as a chain; a bond; as, the chains of habit. 3. A series of things linked together; or a series of things connected and following each other in succession; as, a chain of mountains; a chain of events or ideas. 4. Iron links bolted to the side of a vessel to bold the dead-eyes connected with the shrouds; also, the channels.
Chair (n.) An official seat, as of a chief magistrate or a judge, but esp. that of a professor; hence, the office itself. 2. The presiding officer of an assembly; a chairman; as, to address the chair. 3. A vehicle for one person; either a sedan borne upon poles, or two-wheeled carriage, drawn by one horse; a gig.
Chaja (n.) The crested screamer of Brazil (Palamedea, / Chauna, chavaria), so called in imitation of its notes; -- called also chauna, and faithful kamichi. It is often domesticated and is useful in guarding other poultry. See Kamichi.
Chalk (n.) A soft, earthy substance, of a white, grayish, or yellowish white color, consisting of calcium carbonate, and having the same composition as common limestone. 2. Finely prepared chalk, used as a drawing implement; also, by extension, a compound, as of clay and black lead, or the like, used in the same manner. See Crayon.
Chank (n.) The East Indian name for the large spiral shell of several species of sea conch much used in making bangles, esp. Turbinella pyrum. Called also chank chell.
Chaos (n.) An empty, immeasurable space; a yawning chasm. 2. The confused, unorganized condition or mass of matter before the creation of distinct and orderly forms.
Chape (n.) The piece by which an object is attached to something, as the frog of a scabbard or the metal loop at the back of a buckle by which it is fastened to a strap. 2. The metal plate or tip which protects the end of a scabbard, belt, etc.
Chaps (n. pl.) The jaws, or the fleshy parts about them. See Chap.
Charr (n.) One of the several species of fishes of the genus Salvelinus, allied to the spotted trout and salmon, inhabiting deep lakes in mountainous regions in Europe. In the United States, the brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) is sometimes called a char.
Chara (n.) A genus of flowerless plants, having articulated stems and whorled branches. They flourish in wet places.
Chard (n.) The tender leaves or leafstalks of the artichoke, white beet, etc., blanched for table use. 2. A variety of the white beet, which produces large, succulent leaves and leafstalks.
Charm (n.) A word or combination of words sung or spoken in the practice of magic; a magical combination of words, characters, etc.; an incantation. 2. Any small decorative object worn on the person, as a seal, a key, a silver whistle, or the like. Bunches of charms are often worn at the watch chain. 3. To subdue, control, or summon by incantation or supernatural influence; to affect by magic. 4. To subdue or overcome by some secret power, or by that which gives pleasure; to allay; to soothe. 5. To protect with, or make invulnerable by, spells, charms, or supernatural influences; as, a charmed life.
Chart (n.) A sheet of paper, pasteboard, or the like, on which information is exhibited, esp. when the information is arranged in tabular form; as, an historical chart. 2. A map; esp., a hydrographic or marine map; a map on which is projected a portion of water and the land which it surrounds, or by which it is surrounded, intended especially for the use of seamen; as, the United States Coast Survey charts; the English Admiralty charts.
Chase (n.) A groove, or channel, as in the face of a wall; a trench, as for the reception of drain tile. 2. A kind of joint by which an overlap joint is changed to a flush joint, by means of a gradually deepening rabbet, as at the ends of clinker-built boats.
Chasm (n.) A deep opening made by disruption, as a breach in the earth or a rock; a yawning abyss; a cleft; a fissure. 2. A void space; a gap or break, as in ranks of men.
Cheap (n.) Having a low price in market; of small cost or price, as compared with the usual price or the real value.
Cheat (n.) A troublesome grass, growing as a weed in grain fields; -- called also chess. See Chess. 2. Wheat, or bread made from wheat.
Check (n.) A word of warning denoting that the king is in danger; such a menace of a player's king by an adversary's move as would, if it were any other piece, expose it to immediate capture. A king so menaced is said to be in check, and must be made safe at the next move. 2. A condition of interrupted or impeded progress; arrest; stop; delay; as, to hold an enemy in check. 3. Whatever arrests progress, or limits action; an obstacle, guard, restraint, or rebuff. 4. A mark, certificate, or token, by which, errors may be prevented, or a thing or person may be identified; as, checks placed against items in an account; a check given for baggage; a return check on a railroad. 5. A written order directing a bank or banker to pay money as therein stated. See Bank check, below. 6. A woven or painted design in squares resembling the patten of a checkerboard; one of the squares of such a design; also, cloth having such a figure.
Cheek (n.) Those pieces of a machine, or of any timber, or stone work, which form corresponding sides, or which are similar and in pair; as, the cheeks (jaws) of a vise; the cheeks of a gun carriage, etc. 2. A section of a flask, so made that it can be moved laterally, to permit the removal of the pattern from the mold; the middle part of a flask.
Cheep (n.) A chirp, peep, or squeak, as of a young bird or mouse.
Cheer (n.) That which promotes good spirits or cheerfulness; provisions prepared for a feast; entertainment; as, a table loaded with good cheer. 2. A shout, hurrah, or acclamation, expressing joy enthusiasm, applause, favor, etc.
Cheng (n.) A chinese reed instrument, with tubes, blown by the mouth.
Chert (n.) An impure, massive, flintlike quartz or hornstone, of a dull color.
Chess (n.) A game played on a chessboard, by two persons, with two differently colored sets of men, sixteen in each set. Each player has a king, a queen, two bishops, two knights, two castles or rooks, and eight pawns. 2. A species of brome grass (Bromus secalinus) which is a troublesome weed in wheat fields, and is often erroneously regarded as degenerate or changed wheat; it bears a very slight resemblance to oats, and if reaped and ground up with wheat, so as to be used for food, is said to produce narcotic effects; -- called also cheat and Willard's bromus.
Chest (n.) A large box of wood, or other material, having, like a trunk, a lid, but no covering of skin, leather, or cloth. 2. A case in which certain goods, as tea, opium, etc., are transported; hence, the quantity which such a case contains. 3. A tight receptacle or box, usually for holding gas, steam, liquids, etc.; as, the steam chest of an engine; the wind chest of an organ.
Chica (n.) A red coloring matter. extracted from the Bignonia Chica, used by some tribes of South American Indians to stain the skin. 2. A popular Moorish, Spanish, and South American dance, said to be the original of the fandango, etc.
Chief (n.) The head or leader of any body of men; a commander, as of an army; a head man, as of a tribe, clan, or family; a person in authority who directs the work of others; the principal actor or agent. 2. The upper third part of the field. It is supposed to be composed of the dexter, sinister, and middle chiefs.
Child (n.) A son or a daughter; a male or female descendant, in the first degree; the immediate progeny of human parents; -- in law, legitimate offspring. Used also of animals and plants. 2. A descendant, however remote; -- used esp. in the plural; as, the children of Israel; the children of Edom. 3. One who, by character of practice, shows signs of relationship to, or of the influence of, another; one closely connected with a place, occupation, character, etc.; as, a child of God; a child of the devil; a child of disobedience; a child of toil; a child of the people. 4. A young person of either sex. esp. one between infancy and youth; hence, one who exhibits the characteristics of a very young person, as innocence, obedience, trustfulness, limited understanding, etc.
Chill (n.) A moderate but disagreeable degree of cold; a disagreeable sensation of coolness, accompanied with shivering. 2. A sensation of cold with convulsive shaking of the body, pinched face, pale skin, and blue lips, caused by undue cooling of the body or by nervous excitement, or forming the precursor of some constitutional disturbance, as of a fever. 3. A check to enthusiasm or warmth of feeling; discouragement; as, a chill comes over an assembly. 4. An iron mold or portion of a mold, serving to cool rapidly, and so to harden, the surface of molten iron brought in contact with it. 5. The hardened part of a casting, as the tread of a car wheel.
Chimb (n.) The edge of a cask, etc; a chine. See Chine, n., 3.
Chime (n.) See Chine, n., 3. 2. The harmonious sound of bells, or of musical instruments. 3. A set of bells musically tuned to each other; specif., in the pl., the music performed on such a set of bells by hand, or produced by mechanism to accompany the striking of the hours or their divisions. 4. Pleasing correspondence of proportion, relation, or sound. 5. To sound in harmonious accord, as bells. 6. To make a rude correspondence of sounds; to jingle, as in rhyming.
China (n.) China ware, which is the modern popular term for porcelain. See Porcelain.
Chine (n.) A chink or cleft; a narrow and deep ravine; as, Shanklin Chine in the Isle of Wight, a quarter of a mile long and 230 feet deep. 2. A piece of the backbone of an animal, with the adjoining parts, cut for cooking. [See Illust. of Beef.] 3. The edge or rim of a cask, etc., formed by the projecting ends of the staves; the chamfered end of a stave.
Chink (n.) A small cleft, rent, or fissure, of greater length than breadth; a gap or crack; as, the chinks of wall. 2. A short, sharp sound, as of metal struck with a slight degree of violence.
Chirp (n.) A short, sharp note, as of a bird or insect.
Chive (n.) A perennial plant (Allium Schoenoprasum), allied to the onion. The young leaves are used in omelets, etc.
Chock (n.) A wedge, or block made to fit in any space which it is desired to fill, esp. something to steady a cask or other body, or prevent it from moving, by fitting into the space around or beneath it. 2. A heavy casting of metal, usually fixed near the gunwale. It has two short horn-shaped arms curving inward, between which ropes or hawsers may pass for towing, mooring, etc.
Choir (n.) A band or organized company of singers, especially in church service.
Choke (n.) A stoppage or irritation of the windpipe, producing the feeling of strangulation. 2. A constriction in the bore of a shotgun, case of a rocket, etc.
Chops (n. pl.) The jaws; also, the fleshy parts about the mouth. 2. The sides or capes at the mouth of a river, channel, harbor, or bay; as, the chops of the English Channel.
Chord (n.) A combination of tones simultaneously performed, producing more or less perfect harmony, as, the common chord. 2. A cord. See Cord, n., 4. 3. The upper or lower part of a truss, usually horizontal, resisting compression or tension.
Chore (n.) A small job; in the pl., the regular or daily light work of a household or farm, either within or without doors.
Chuck (n.) A sudden, small noise. 2. A contrivance or machine fixed to the mandrel of a lathe, for holding a tool or the material to be operated upon. 3. A game played with chucks, in which one or more are tossed up and caught; jackstones. 4. A piece of the backbone of an animal, from between the neck and the collar bone, with the adjoining parts, cut for cooking; as, a chuck steak; a chuck roast.
Chufa (n.) A sedgelike plant (Cyperus esculentus) producing edible tubers, native about the Mediterranean, now cultivated in many regions; the earth almond.
Chump (n.) A short, thick, heavy piece of wood.
Chunk (n.) A short, thick piece of anything.
Churl (n.) A rough, surly, ill-bred man; a boor.
Chirm (n.) Clamor, or confused noise; buzzing.
Chute (n.) A framework, trough, or tube, upon or through which objects are made to slide from a higher to a lower level, or through which water passes to a wheel.
Chyle (n.) A milky fluid containing the fatty matter of the food in a state of emulsion, or fine mechanical division; formed from chyme by the action of the intestinal juices. It is absorbed by the lacteals, and conveyed into the blood by the thoracic duct.
Cibol (n.) A perennial alliaceous plant (Allium fistulosum), sometimes called Welsh onion. Its fistular leaves areused in cookery.
Cider (n.) The expressed juice of apples. It is used as a beverage, for making vinegar, and for other purposes.
Cigar (n.) A small roll of tobacco, used for smoking.
Cilia (n. pl.) Small, generally microscopic, vibrating appendages lining certain organs, as the air passages of the higher animals, and in the lower animals often covering also the whole or a part of the exterior. They are also found on some vegetable organisms. In the Infusoria, and many larval forms, they are locomotive organs. 2. Hairlike processes, commonly marginal and forming a fringe like the eyelash. 3. Small, vibratory, swimming organs, somewhat resembling true cilia, as those of Ctenophora.
Cinch (n.) A strong saddle girth, as of canvas.
Cisco (n.) The Lake herring (Coregonus Artedi), valuable food fish of the Great Lakes of North America. The name is also applied to C. Hoyi, a related species of Lake Michigan.
Cital (n.) Summons to appear, as before a judge.
Civet (n.) A substance, of the consistence of butter or honey, taken from glands in the anal pouch of the civet (Viverra civetta). It is of clear yellowish or brownish color, of a strong, musky odor, offensive when undiluted, but agreeable when a small portion is mixed with another substance. It is used as a perfume. 2. The animal that produces civet (Viverra civetta); -- called also civet cat. It is carnivorous, from two to three feet long, and of a brownish gray color, with transverse black bands and spots on the body and tail. It is a native of northern Africa and of Asia. The name is also applied to other species.
Clack (n.) To make a sudden, sharp noise, or a succesion of such noises, as by striking an object, or by collision of parts; to rattle; to click. 2. To utter words rapidly and continually, or with abruptness; to let the tongue run.
Claim (n.) A right to claim or demand something; a title to any debt, privilege, or other thing in possession of another; also, a title to anything which another should give or concede to, or confer on, the claimant.
Clamp (n.) Something rigid that holds fast or binds things together; a piece of wood or metal, used to hold two or more pieces together. 2. A piece of wood placed across another, or inserted into another, to bind or strengthen. 3. One of a pair of movable pieces of lead, or other soft material, to cover the jaws of a vise and enable it to grasp without bruising. 4. A thick plank on the inner part of a ship's side, used to sustain the ends of beams. 5. A mass of bricks heaped up to be burned; or of ore for roasting, or of coal for coking.
Clang (n.) A loud, ringing sound, like that made by metallic substances when clanged or struck together.
Clank (n.) A sharp, brief, ringing sound, made by a collision of metallic or other sonorous bodies; -- usually expressing a duller or less resounding sound than clang, and a deeper and stronger sound than clink.
Clary (n.) A plant (Salvia sclarea) of the Sage family, used in flavoring soups.
Clash (n.) Opposition; contradiction; as between differing or contending interests, views, purposes, etc.
Clasp (n.) An adjustable catch, bent plate, or hook, for holding together two objects or the parts of anything, as the ends of a belt, the covers of a book, etc. 2. A close embrace; a throwing of the arms around; a grasping, as with the hand.
Class (n.) A group of individuals ranked together as possessing common characteristics; as, the different classes of society; the educated class; the lower classes. 2. A number of students in a school or college, of the same standing, or pursuing the same studies. 3. A comprehensive division of animate or inanimate objects, grouped together on account of their common characteristics, in any classification in natural science, and subdivided into orders, families, tribes, genera, etc. 4. A set; a kind or description, species or variety. 5. One of the sections into which a church or congregation is divided, and which is under the supervision of a class leader. 6. To arrange in classes; to classify or refer to some class; as, to class words or passages. 7. To divide into classes, as students; to form into, or place in, a class or classes.
Clear (n.) Full extent; distance between extreme limits; especially; the distance between the nearest surfaces of two bodies, or the space between walls; as, a room ten feet square in the clear.
Cleat (n.) A strip of wood or iron fastened on transversely to something in order to give strength, prevent warping, hold position, etc. 2. A device made of wood or metal, having two arms, around which turns may be taken with a line or rope so as to hold securely and yet be readily released. It is bolted by the middle to a deck or mast, etc., or it may be lashed to a rope.
Cleft (n.) A space or opening made by splitting; a crack; a crevice; as, the cleft of a rock. 2. A piece made by splitting; as, a cleft of wood.
Clerk (n.) A parish officer, being a layman who leads in reading the responses of the Episcopal church service, and otherwise assists in it. 2. One employed to keep records or accounts; a scribe; an accountant; as, the clerk of a court; a town clerk.
Click (n.) A slight sharp noise, such as is made by the cocking of a pistol. 2. A kind of articulation used by the natives of Southern Africa, consisting in a sudden withdrawal of the end or some other portion of the tongue from a part of the mouth with which it is in contact, whereby a sharp, clicking sound is produced. The sounds are four in number, and are called cerebral, palatal, dental, and lateral clicks or clucks, the latter being the noise ordinarily used in urging a horse forward. 3. A detent, pawl, or ratchet, as that which catches the cogs of a ratchet wheel to prevent backward motion. See Illust. of Ratched wheel.
Cliff (n.) A high, steep rock; a precipice.
Clink (n.) A slight, sharp, tinkling sound, made by the collision of sonorous bodies.
Cloak (n.) A loose outer garment, extending from the neck downwards, and commonly without sleeves. It is longer than a cape, and is worn both by men and by women.
Clock (n.) A machine for measuring time, indicating the hour and other divisions by means of hands moving on a dial plate. Its works are moved by a weight or a spring, and it is often so constructed as to tell the hour by the stroke of a hammer on a bell. It is not adapted, like the watch, to be carried on the person. 2. A watch, esp. one that strikes. 3. A large beetle, esp. the European dung beetle (Scarabaeus stercorarius).
Cloff (n.) Formerly an allowance of two pounds in every three hundred weight after the tare and tret are subtracted; now used only in a general sense, of small deductions from the original weight.
Close (n.) To stop, or fill up, as an opening; to shut; as, to close the eyes; to close a door. 2. To bring together the parts of; to consolidate; as, to close the ranks of an army; -- often used with up. 3. To bring to an end or period; to conclude; to complete; to finish; to end; to consummate; as, to close a bargain; to close a course of instruction.
Cloth (n.) A fabric made of fibrous material (or sometimes of wire, as in wire cloth); commonly, a woven fabric of cotton, woolen, or linen, adapted to be made into garments; specifically, woolen fabrics, as distinguished from all others. 2. The distinctive dress of any profession, especially of the clergy; hence, the clerical profession.
Cloud (n.) A collection of visible vapor, or watery particles, suspended in the upper atmosphere. 2. A mass or volume of smoke, or flying dust, resembling vapor. 3. A dark vein or spot on a lighter material, as in marble; hence, a blemish or defect; as, a cloud upon one's reputation; a cloud on a title. 4. That which has a dark, lowering, or threatening aspect; that which temporarily overshadows, obscures, or depresses; as, a cloud of sorrow; a cloud of war; a cloud upon the intellect. 5. A large, loosely-knitted scarf, worn by women about the head.
Clout (n.) To cover with cloth, leather, or other material; to bandage; patch, or mend, with a clout. 2. To quard with an iron plate, as an axletree. 3. To stud with nails, as a timber, or a boot sole.
Clove (n.) A very pungent aromatic spice, the unexpanded flower bud of the clove tree (Eugenia, / Caryophullus, aromatica), a native of the Molucca Isles. 2. One of the small bulbs developed in the axils of the scales of a large bulb, as in the case of garlic. 3. A weight. A clove of cheese is about eight pounds, of wool, about seven pounds.
Clown (n.) The fool or buffoon in a play, circus, etc.
Cluck (n.) A click. See 3d Click, 2.
Cnida (n.) One of the peculiar stinging, cells found in Coelenterata; a nematocyst; a lasso cell.
Coach (n.) A large, closed, four-wheeled carriage, having doors in the sides, and generally a front and back seat inside, each for two persons, and an elevated outside seat in front for the driver. 2. A cabin on the after part of the quarter-deck, usually occupied by the captain. 3. A first-class passenger car, as distinguished from a drawing-room car, sleeping car, etc. It is sometimes loosely applied to any passenger car.
Coaly (n.) Pertaining to, or resembling, coal; containing coal; of the nature of coal.
Coast (n.) To slide down hill; to slide on a sled, upon snow or ice.
Coati (n.) A mammal of tropical America of the genus Nasua, allied to the raccoon, but with a longer body, tail, and nose.
Cobia (n.) An oceanic fish of large size (Elacate canada); the crabeater; -- called also bonito, cubbyyew, coalfish, and sergeant fish.
Coble (n.) A flat-floored fishing boat with a lug sail, and a drop rudder extending from two to four feet below the keel. It was originally used on the stormy coast of Yorkshire, England.
Cocoa (n.) A preparation made from the seeds of the chocolate tree, and used in making, a beverage; also the beverage made from cocoa or cocoa shells.
Codex (n.) An ancient manuscript of the Sacred Scriptures, or any part of them, particularly the New Testament.
Colic (n.) A severe paroxysmal pain in the abdomen, due to spasm, obstruction, or distention of some one of the hollow viscera.
Colon (n.) A point or character, formed thus [:], used to separate parts of a sentence that are complete in themselves and nearly independent, often taking the place of a conjunction.
Color (n.) A property depending on the relations of light to the eye, by which individual and specific differences in the hues and tints of objects are apprehended in vision; as, gay colors; sad colors, etc. 2. That which is used to give color; a paint; a pigment; as, oil colors or water colors. 3. A distinguishing badge, as a flag or similar symbol (usually in the plural); as, the colors or color of a ship or regiment; the colors of a race horse (that is, of the cap and jacket worn by the jockey). 4. An apparent right; as where the defendant in trespass gave to the plaintiff an appearance of title, by stating his title specially, thus removing the cause from the jury to the court.
Colza (n.) A variety of cabbage (Brassica oleracea), cultivated for its seeds, which yield an oil valued for illuminating and lubricating purposes; summer rape.
Comer (n.) One who comes, or who has come; one who has arrived, and is present.
Comet (n.) A member of the solar system which usually moves in an elongated orbit, approaching very near to the sun in its perihelion, and receding to a very great distance from it at its aphelion. A comet commonly consists of three parts: the nucleus, the envelope, or coma, and the tail; but one or more of these parts is frequently wanting. See Illustration in Appendix.
Comma (n.) A character or point [,] marking the smallest divisions of a sentence, written or printed. 2. A small interval (the difference between a major and minor half step), seldom used except by tuners.
Conch (n.) A name applied to various marine univalve shells; esp. to those of the genus Strombus, which are of large size. S. gigas is the large pink West Indian conch. The large king, queen, and cameo conchs are of the genus Cassis. See Cameo. 2. In works of art, the shell used by Tritons as a trumpet. 3. One of the white natives of the Bahama Islands or one of their descendants in the Florida Keys; -- so called from the commonness of the conch there, or because they use it for food. 4. See Concha, n. 5. The external ear. See Concha, n., 2.
Conge (n.) The act of taking leave; parting ceremony; farewell; also, dismissal.
Congo (n.) Black tea, of higher grade (finer leaf and less dusty) than the present bohea. See Tea.
Conus (n.) A Linnean genus of mollusks having a conical shell. See Cone, n., 4.
Cooky (n.) A small, flat, sweetened cake of various kinds.
Coomb (n.) A dry measure of four bushels, or half a quarter.
Copra (n.) The dried meat of the cocoanut, from which cocoanut oil is expressed.
Coral (n.) The hard parts or skeleton of various Anthozoa, and of a few Hydrozoa. Similar structures are also formed by some Bryozoa. 2. A piece of coral, usually fitted with small bells and other appurtenances, used by children as a plaything.
Corby (n.) A raven, crow, or chough, used as a charge.
Corer (n.) That which cores; an instrument for coring fruit; as, an apple corer.
Cornu (n.) A horn, or anything shaped like or resembling a horn.
Corps (n. sing. & pl.) The human body, whether living or dead. 2. A body of men; esp., an organized division of the military establishment; as, the marine corps; the corps of topographical engineers; specifically, an army corps.
Costa (n.) A rib or vein of a leaf, especially the midrib.
Count (n.) A nobleman on the continent of Europe, equal in rank to an English earl.
Coupe (n.) The front compartment of a French diligence; also, the front compartment (usually for three persons) of a car or carriage on British railways. 2. A four-wheeled close carriage for two persons inside, with an outside seat for the driver; -- so called because giving the appearance of a larger carriage cut off.
Court (n.) An inclosed space; a courtyard; an uncovered area shut in by the walls of a building, or by different building; also, a space opening from a street and nearly surrounded by houses; a blind alley. 2. The residence of a sovereign, prince, nobleman, or ether dignitary; a palace. 3. Any formal assembling of the retinue of a sovereign; as, to hold a court. 4. The hall, chamber, or place, where justice is administered. 5. The persons officially assembled under authority of law, at the appropriate time and place, for the administration of justice; an official assembly, legally met together for the transaction of judicial business; a judge or judges sitting for the hearing or trial of causes. 6. The judge or judges; as distinguished from the counsel or jury, or both. 7. Any jurisdiction, civil, military, or ecclesiastical. 8. A place arranged for playing the game of tennis; also, one of the divisions of a tennis court.
Cover (n.) Anything which is laid, set, or spread, upon, about, or over, another thing; an envelope; a lid; as, the cover of a book. 2. Shelter; protection; as, the troops fought under cover of the batteries; the woods afforded a good cover. 3. The woods, underbrush, etc., which shelter and conceal game; covert; as, to beat a cover; to ride to cover. 4. A tablecloth, and the other table furniture; esp., the table furniture for the use of one person at a meal; as, covers were laid for fifty guests.
Covey (n.) A brood or hatch of birds; an old bird with her brood of young; hence, a small flock or number of birds together; -- said of game; as, a covey of partridges. 2. A company; a bevy; as, a covey of girls.
Coypu (n.) A South American rodent (Myopotamus coypus), allied to the beaver. It produces a valuable fur called nutria.
Crack (n.) A partial separation of parts, with or without a perceptible opening; a chink or fissure; a narrow breach; a crevice; as, a crack in timber, or in a wall, or in glass. 2. Rupture; flaw; breach, in a moral sense. 3. A sharp, sudden sound or report; the sound of anything suddenly burst or broken; as, the crack of a falling house; the crack of thunder; the crack of a whip. 4. Mental flaw; a touch of craziness; partial insanity; as, he has a crack. 5. A boy, generally a pert, lively boy. 6. A brief time; an instant; as, to be with one in a crack.
Craft (n.) Art or skill; dexterity in particular manual employment; hence, the occupation or employment itself; manual art; a trade. 2. Those engaged in any trade, taken collectively; a guild; as, the craft of ironmongers. 3. Cunning, art, or skill, in a bad sense, or applied to bad purposes; artifice; guile; skill or dexterity employed to effect purposes by deceit or shrewd devices.
Crake (n.) A boast. See Crack, n.
Cramp (n.) A device, usually of iron bent at the ends, used to hold together blocks of stone, timbers, etc.; a cramp iron. 2. A rectangular frame, with a tightening screw, used for compressing the joints of framework, etc. 3. A piece of wood having a curve corresponding to that of the upper part of the instep, on which the upper leather of a boot is stretched to give it the requisite shape. 4. A spasmodic and painful involuntary contraction of a muscle or muscles, as of the leg.
Crane (n.) A measure for fresh herrings, -- as many as will fill a barrel. 2. A wading bird of the genus Grus, and allied genera, of various species, having a long, straight bill, and long legs and neck. 3. A machine for raising and lowering heavy weights, and, while holding them suspended, transporting them through a limited lateral distance. In one form it consists of a projecting arm or jib of timber or iron, a rotating post or base, and the necessary tackle, windlass, etc.; -- so called from a fancied similarity between its arm and the neck of a crane See Illust. of Derrick. 4. An iron arm with horizontal motion, attached to the side or back of a fireplace, for supporting kettles, etc., over a fire. 5. A siphon, or bent pipe, for drawing liquors out of a cask. 6. A forked post or projecting bracket to support spars, etc., -- generally used in pairs. See Crotch, 2.
Crank (n.) A bent portion of an axle, or shaft, or an arm keyed at right angles to the end of a shaft, by which motion is imparted to or received from it; also used to change circular into reciprocating motion, or reciprocating into circular motion. See Bell crank. 2. Any bend, turn, or winding, as of a passage. 3. A twist or turn of the mind; caprice; whim; crotchet; also, a fit of temper or passion. 4. Liable to careen or be overset, as a ship when she is too narrow, or has not sufficient ballast, or is loaded too high, to carry full sail.
Crape (n.) A thin, crimped stuff, made of raw silk gummed and twisted on the mill. Black crape is much used for mourning garments, also for the dress of some clergymen. 2. To form into ringlets; to curl; to crimp; to friz; as, to crape the hair; to crape silk.
Crash (n.) A loud, sudden, confused sound, as of many things falling and breaking at once. 2. Ruin; failure; sudden breaking down, as of a business house or a commercial enterprise. 3. Coarse, heavy, narrow linen cloth, used esp. for towels.
Crate (n.) A large basket or hamper of wickerwork, used for the transportation of china, crockery, and similar wares. 2. A box or case whose sides are of wooden slats with interspaces, -- used especially for transporting fruit.
Crawl (n.) The act or motion of crawling; slow motion, as of a creeping animal. 2. A pen or inclosure of stakes and hurdles on the seacoast, for holding fish.
Craze (n.) A temporary passion or infatuation, as for same new amusement, pursuit, or fashion; as, the bric-a-brac craze; the aesthetic craze.
Cream (n.) The rich, oily, and yellowish part of milk, which, when the milk stands unagitated, rises, and collects on the surface. It is the part of milk from which butter is obtained. 2. The part of any liquor that rises, and collects on the surface. 3. A delicacy of several kinds prepared for the table from cream, etc., or so as to resemble cream. 4. The best or choicest part of a thing; the quintessence; as, the cream of a jest or story; the cream of a collection of books or pictures.
Credo (n.) The creed, as sung or read in the Roman Catholic church.
Creek (n.) A small inlet or bay, narrower and extending further into the land than a cove; a recess in the shore of the sea, or of a river.
Creel (n.) An osier basket, such as anglers use. 2. A bar or set of bars with skewers for holding paying-off bobbins, as in the roving machine, throstle, and mule.
Creep (n.) A distressing sensation, or sound, like that occasioned by the creeping of insects. 2. A slow rising of the floor of a gallery, occasioned by the pressure of incumbent strata upon the pillars or sides; a gradual movement of mining ground.
Crees (n. pl.) An Algonquin tribe of Indians, inhabiting a large part of British America east of the Rocky Mountains and south of Hudson's Bay.
Cress (n.) A plant of various species, chiefly cruciferous. The leaves have a moderately pungent taste, and are used as a salad and antiscorbutic.
Crest (n.) A tuft, or other excrescence or natural ornament, growing on an animal's head; the comb of a cock; the swelling on the head of a serpent; the lengthened feathers of the crown or nape of bird, etc. 2. The plume of feathers, or other decoration, worn on a helmet; the distinctive ornament of a helmet, indicating the rank of the wearer; hence, also, the helmet. 3. A bearing worn, not upon the shield, but usually above it, or separately as an ornament for plate, liveries, and the like. It is a relic of the ancient cognizance. See Cognizance, 4. 4. The helm or head, as typical of a high spirit; pride; courage. 5. The ornamental finishing which surmounts the ridge of a roof, canopy, etc.
Creux (n.) Used in English only in the expression en creux. Thus, engraving en creux is engraving in intaglio, or by sinking or hollowing out the design.
Crick (n.) The creaking of a door, or a noise resembling it. 2. A painful, spasmodic affection of the muscles of some part of the body, as of the neck or back, rendering it difficult to move the part.
Crier (n.) an officer who proclaims the orders or directions of a court, or who gives public notice by loud proclamation; as, a town-crier.
Crime (n.) Any violation of law, either divine or human; an omission of a duty commanded, or the commission of an act forbidden by law. 2. Gross violation of human law, in distinction from a misdemeanor or trespass, or other slight offense. Hence, also, any aggravated offense against morality or the public welfare; any outrage or great wrong.
Crisp (n.) That which is crisp or brittle; the state of being crisp or brittle; as, burned to a crisp; specifically, the rind of roasted pork; crackling.
Crith (n.) The unit for estimating the weight of a/riform substances; -- the weight of a liter of hydrogen at 0/ centigrade, and with a tension of 76 centimeters of mercury. It is 0.0896 of a gram, or 1.38274 grains.
Croak (n.) The coarse, harsh sound uttered by a frog or a raven, or a like sound.
Croat (n.) A native of Croatia, in Austria; esp., one of the native Slavic race. 2. An irregular soldier, generally from Croatia.
Crock (n.) The loose black particles collected from combustion, as on pots and kettles, or in a chimney; soot; smut; also, coloring matter which rubs off from cloth. 2. Any piece of crockery, especially of coarse earthenware; an earthen pot or pitcher.
Croft (n.) A small, inclosed field, adjoining a house; a small farm.
Crois (n.) See Cross, n.
Crone (n.) An old man; especially, a man who talks and acts like an old woman.
Crook (n.) A bend, turn, or curve; curvature; flexure. 2. The staff used by a shepherd, the hook of which serves to hold a runaway sheep. 3. A small tube, usually curved, applied to a trumpet, horn, etc., to change its pitch or key. 4. A person given to fraudulent practices; an accomplice of thieves, forgers, etc.
Croon (n.) A low, continued moan; a murmur. 2. A low singing; a plain, artless melody.
Crore (n.) Ten millions; as, a crore of rupees (which is nearly $5,000,000).
Cross (n.) A gibbet, consisting of two pieces of timber placed transversely upon one another, in various forms, as a T, or +, with the horizontal piece below the upper end of the upright, or as an X. It was anciently used in the execution of criminals. 2. The sign or mark of the cross, made with the finger, or in ink, etc., or actually represented in some material; the symbol of Christ's death; the ensign and chosen symbol of Christianity, of a Christian people, and of Christendom. 3. A piece of money stamped with the figure of a cross, also, that side of such a piece on which the cross is stamped; hence, money in general. 4. An appendage or ornament or anything in the form of a cross; a badge or ornamental device of the general shape of a cross; hence, such an ornament, even when varying considerably from that form; thus, the Cross of the British Order of St. George and St. Michael consists of a central medallion with seven arms radiating from it. 5. A monument in the form of a cross, or surmounted by a cross, set up in a public place; as, a market cross; a boundary cross; Charing Cross in London. 6. A common heraldic bearing, of which there are many varieties. See the Illustration, above. 7. A mixing of breeds or stock, especially in cattle breeding; or the product of such intermixture; a hybrid of any kind.
Croud (n.) See Crowd, a violin.
Croup (n.) The hinder part or buttocks of certain quadrupeds, especially of a horse; hence, the place behind the saddle. 2. An inflammatory affection of the larynx or trachea, accompanied by a hoarse, ringing cough and stridulous, difficult breathing; esp., such an affection when associated with the development of a false membrane in the air passages (also called membranous croup). See False croup, under False, and Diphtheria.
Crowd (n.) An ancient instrument of music with six strings; a kind of violin, being the oldest known stringed instrument played with a bow.
Crown (n.) A wreath or garland, or any ornamental fillet encircling the head, especially as a reward of victory or mark of honorable distinction; hence, anything given on account of, or obtained by, faithful or successful effort; a reward. 2. A royal headdress or cap of sovereignty, worn by emperors, kings, princes, etc. 3. Anything which imparts beauty, splendor, honor, dignity, or finish. 4. The topmost part of the head (see Illust. of Bird.); that part of the head from which the hair descends toward the sides and back; also, the head or brain. 5. The part of a tooth which projects above the gum; also, the top or grinding surface of a tooth. 6. The vertex or top of an arch; -- applied generally to about one third of the curve, but in a pointed arch to the apex only. 7. The rounding, or rounded part, of the deck from a level line. 8. A round spot shaved clean on the top of the head, as a mark of the clerical state; the tonsure. 9. A coin stamped with the image of a crown; hence,a denomination of money; as, the English crown, a silver coin of the value of five shillings sterling, or a little more than $1.20; the Danish or Norwegian crown, a money of account, etc., worth nearly twenty-seven cents. 10. An ornaments or decoration representing a crown; as, the paper is stamped with a crown. 11. To cover, decorate, or invest with a crown; hence, to invest with royal dignity and power. 12. To bestow something upon as a mark of honor, dignity, or recompense; to adorn; to dignify. 13. To cause to round upward; to make anything higher at the middle than at the edges, as the face of a machine pulley. 14. To effect a lodgment upon, as upon the crest of the glacis, or the summit of the breach.
Crows (n. pl.) A tribe of Indians of the Dakota stock, living in Montana; -- also called Upsarokas.
Croys (n.) See Cross, n.
Croze (n.) A cooper's tool for making the grooves for the heads of casks, etc.; also, the groove itself.
Cruet (n.) A bottle or vessel; esp., a vial or small glass bottle for holding vinegar, oil, pepper, or the like, for the table; a caster. 2. A vessel used to hold wine, oil, or water for the service of the altar.
Crumb (n.) A small fragment or piece; especially, a small piece of bread or other food, broken or cut off. 2. Fig.: A little; a bit; as, a crumb of comfort.
Cruor (n.) The coloring matter of the blood; the clotted portion of coagulated blood, containing the coloring matter; gore.
Cruse (n.) A bottle for holding water, oil, honey, etc.
Crush (n.) Violent pressure, as of a crowd; a crowd which produced uncomfortable pressure; as, a crush at a peception.
Crust (n.) The hard external coat or covering of anything; the hard exterior surface or outer shell; an incrustation; as, a crust of snow. 2. The hard exterior or surface of bread, in distinction from the soft part or crumb; or a piece of bread grown dry or hard. 3. The cover or case of a pie, in distinction from the soft contents. 4. The dough, or mass of doughy paste, cooked with a potpie; -- also called dumpling. 5. The exterior portion of the earth, formerly universally supposed to inclose a molten interior. 6. The shell of crabs, lobsters, etc. 7. A hard mass, made up of dried secretions blood, or pus, occurring upon the surface of the body. 8. An incrustation on the interior of wine bottles, the result of the ripening of the wine; a deposit of tartar, etc. See Beeswing.
Crypt (n.) A vault wholly or partly under ground; especially, a vault under a church, whether used for burial purposes or for a subterranean chapel or oratory. 2. A simple gland, glandular cavity, or tube; a follicle; as, the crypts of Lieberk/hn, the simple tubular glands of the small intestines.
Cubeb (n.) The small, spicy berry of a species of pepper (Piper Cubeba; in med., Cubeba officinalis), native in Java and Borneo, but now cultivated in various tropical countries. The dried unripe fruit is much used in medicine as a stimulant and purgative.
Cubit (n.) The forearm; the ulna, a bone of the arm extending from elbow to wrist. 2. A measure of length, being the distance from the elbow to the extremity of the middle finger.
Cuddy (n.) An ass; esp., one driven by a huckster or greengrocer. 2. A lever mounted on a tripod for lifting stones, leveling up railroad ties, etc. 3. A small cabin: also, the galley or kitchen of a vessel.
Culex (n.) A genus of dipterous insects, including the gnat and mosquito.
Cully (n.) A person easily deceived, tricked, or imposed on; a mean dupe; a gull. 2. To trick, cheat, or impose on; to deceive.
Culpa (n.) Negligence or fault, as distinguishable from dolus (deceit, fraud), which implies intent, culpa being imputable to defect of intellect, dolus to defect of heart.
Cumin (n.) A dwarf umbelliferous plant, somewhat resembling fennel (Cuminum Cyminum), cultivated for its seeds, which have a bitterish, warm taste, with an aromatic flavor, and are used like those of anise and caraway.
Cupel (n.) A shallow porous cup, used in refining precious metals, commonly made of bone ashes (phosphate of lime).
Curer (n.) One who prepares beef, fish, etc., for preservation by drying, salting, smoking, etc.
Curia (n.) The Roman See in its temporal aspects, including all the machinery of administration; -- called also curia Romana.
Curry (n.) A kind of sauce much used in India, containing garlic, pepper, ginger, and other strong spices. 2. A stew of fowl, fish, or game, cooked with curry.
Cutin (n.) The substance which, added to the material of a cell wall, makes it waterproof, as in cork.
Cycad (n.) Any plant of the natural order Cycadaceae, as the sago palm, etc.
Cycas (n.) A genus of trees, intermediate in character between the palms and the pines. The pith of the trunk of some species furnishes a valuable kind of sago.
Cycle (n.) An interval of time in which a certain succession of events or phenomena is completed, and then returns again and again, uniformly and continually in the same order; a periodical space of time marked by the recurrence of something peculiar; as, the cycle of the seasons, or of the year. 2. The circle of subjects connected with the exploits of the hero or heroes of some particular period which have served as a popular theme for poetry, as the legend of Arthur and the knights of the Round Table, and that of Charlemagne and his paladins. 3. One entire round in a circle or a spire; as, a cycle or set of leaves. 4. A bicycle or tricycle, or other light velocipede.
Cynic (n.) One of a sect or school of philosophers founded by Antisthenes, and of whom Diogenes was a disciple. The first Cynics were noted for austere lives and their scorn for social customs and current philosophical opinions. Hence the term Cynic symbolized, in the popular judgment, moroseness, and contempt for the views of others. 2. One who holds views resembling those of the Cynics; a snarler; a misanthrope; particularly, a person who believes that human conduct is directed, either consciously or unconsciously, wholly by self-interest or self-indulgence, and that appearances to the contrary are superficial and untrustworthy.
Czech (n.) The language of the Czechs (often called Bohemian), the harshest and richest of the Slavic languages.
Daily (n.) A publication which appears regularly every day; as, the morning dailies.
Dairy (n.) The place, room, or house where milk is kept, and converted into butter or cheese. 2. That department of farming which is concerned in the production of milk, and its conversion into butter and cheese.
Daisy (n.) A genus of low herbs (Bellis), belonging to the family Compositae. The common English and classical daisy is B. prennis, which has a yellow disk and white or pinkish rays. 2. The whiteweed (Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum), the plant commonly called daisy in North America; -- called also oxeye daisy. See Whiteweed.
Dakir (n.) A measure of certain commodities by number, usually ten or twelve, but sometimes twenty; as, a daker of hides consisted of ten skins; a daker of gloves of ten pairs.
Daman (n.) A small herbivorous mammal of the genus Hyrax. The species found in Palestine and Syria is Hyrax Syriacus; that of Northern Africa is H. Brucei; -- called also ashkoko, dassy, and rock rabbit. See Cony, and Hyrax.
Dandy (n.) A small sail carried at or near the stern of small boats; -- called also jigger, and mizzen.
Darby (n.) A plasterer's float, having two handles; -- used in smoothing ceilings, etc.
Daric (n.) A gold coin of ancient Persia, weighing usually a little more than 128 grains, and bearing on one side the figure of an archer. 2. A silver coin of about 86 grains, having the figure of an archer, and hence, in modern times, called a daric.
Davit (n.) A spar formerly used on board of ships, as a crane to hoist the flukes of the anchor to the top of the bow, without injuring the sides of the ship; -- called also the fish davit. 2. Curved arms of timber or iron, projecting over a ship's side of stern, having tackle to raise or lower a boat, swing it in on deck, rig it out for lowering, etc.; -- called also boat davits.
Debit (n.) A debt; an entry on the debtor (Dr.) side of an account; -- mostly used adjectively; as, the debit side of an account.
Debut (n.) A beginning or first attempt; hence, a first appearance before the public, as of an actor or public speaker.
Decay (n.) Gradual failure of health, strength, soundness, prosperity, or of any species of excellence or perfection; tendency toward dissolution or extinction; corruption; rottenness; decline; deterioration; as, the decay of the body; the decay of virtue; the decay of the Roman empire; a castle in decay.
Decoy (n.) Anything intended to lead into a snare; a lure that deceives and misleads into danger, or into the power of an enemy; a bait. 2. A fowl, or the likeness of one, used by sportsmen to entice other fowl into a net or within shot. 3. A place into which wild fowl, esp. ducks, are enticed in order to take or shoot them. 4. A person employed by officers of justice, or parties exposed to injury, to induce a suspected person to commit an offense under circumstances that will lead to his detection.
Decyl (n.) A hydrocarbon radical, C10H21, never existing alone, but regarded as the characteristic constituent of a number of compounds of the paraffin series.
Deism (n.) The doctrine or creed of a deist; the belief or system of those who acknowledge the existence of one God, but deny revelation.
Deist (n.) One who believes in the existence of a God, but denies revealed religion; a freethinker.
Deity (n.) The collection of attributes which make up the nature of a god; divinity; godhead; as, the deity of the Supreme Being is seen in his works.
Delay (n.) To retard; to stop, detain, or hinder, for a time; to retard the motion, or time of arrival, of; as, the mail is delayed by a heavy fall of snow.
Delta (n.) A tract of land shaped like the letter delta (/), especially when the land is alluvial and inclosed between two or more mouths of a river; as, the delta of the Ganges, of the Nile, or of the Mississippi.
Demon (n.) A spirit, or immaterial being, holding a middle place between men and deities in pagan mythology. 2. One's genius; a tutelary spirit or internal voice; as, the demon of Socrates.
Denim (n.) A coarse cotton drilling used for overalls, etc.
Depot (n.) A military station where stores and provisions are kept, or where recruits are assembled and drilled. 2. The headquarters of a regiment, where all supplies are received and distributed, recruits are assembled and instructed, infirm or disabled soldiers are taken care of, and all the wants of the regiment are provided for.
Depth (n.) The quality of being deep; deepness; perpendicular measurement downward from the surface, or horizontal measurement backward from the front; as, the depth of a river; the depth of a body of troops. 2. Profoundness; extent or degree of intensity; abundance; completeness; as, depth of knowledge, or color. 3. Lowness; as, depth of sound. 4. That which is deep; a deep, or the deepest, part or place; the deep; the middle part; as, the depth of night, or of winter.
Derby (n.) A race for three-old horses, run annually at Epsom (near London), for the Derby stakes. It was instituted by the 12th Earl of Derby, in 1780.
Deuce (n.) Two; a card or a die with two spots; as, the deuce of hearts. 2. A condition of the score beginning whenever each side has won three strokes in the same game (also reckoned ""40 all""), and reverted to as often as a tie is made until one of the sides secures two successive strokes following a tie or deuce, which decides the game.
Devil (n.) The Evil One; Satan, represented as the tempter and spiritual of mankind. 2. A very wicked person; hence, any great evil. 3. An expletive of surprise, vexation, or emphasis, or, ironically, of negation. 4. A dish, as a bone with the meat, broiled and excessively peppered; a grill with Cayenne pepper. 5. A machine for tearing or cutting rags, cotton, etc.
Devon (n.) One of a breed of hardy cattle originating in the country of Devon, England. Those of pure blood have a deep red color. The small, longhorned variety, called North Devons, is distinguished by the superiority of its working oxen.
Dhole (n.) A fierce, wild dog (Canis Dukhunensis), found in the mountains of India. It is remarkable for its propensity to hunt the tiger and other wild animals in packs.
Diana (n.) The daughter of Jupiter and Latona; a virgin goddess who presided over hunting, chastity, and marriage; -- identified with the Greek goddess Artemis.
Diary (n.) A register of daily events or transactions; a daily record; a journal; a blank book dated for the record of daily memoranda; as, a diary of the weather; a physician's diary.
Dicky (n.) A seat behind a carriage, for a servant.
Digit (n.) A finger's breadth, commonly estimated to be three fourths of an inch. 2. One of the ten figures or symbols, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, by which all numbers are expressed; -- so called because of the use of the fingers in counting and computing. 3. One twelfth part of the diameter of the sun or moon; -- a term used to express the quantity of an eclipse; as, an eclipse of eight digits is one which hides two thirds of the diameter of the disk.
Diker (n.) One who builds stone walls; usually, one who builds them without lime.
Dingo (n.) A wild dog found in Australia, but supposed to have introduced at a very early period. It has a wolflike face, bushy tail, and a reddish brown color.
Ditch (n.) A trench made in the earth by digging, particularly a trench for draining wet land, for guarding or fencing inclosures, or for preventing an approach to a town or fortress. In the latter sense, it is called also a moat or a fosse. 2. Any long, narrow receptacle for water on the surface of the earth.
Ditto (n.) The aforesaid thing; the same (as before). Often contracted to do., or to two ""turned commas"" (""), or small marks. Used in bills, books of account, tables of names, etc., to save repetition.
Divan (n.) A book; esp., a collection of poems written by one author; as, the divan of Hafiz. 2. A saloon or hall where a council is held, in Oriental countries, the state reception room in places, and in the houses of the richer citizens. Cushions on the floor or on benches are ranged round the room. 3. A cushioned seat, or a large, low sofa or couch; especially, one fixed to its place, and not movable.
Diver (n.) One who, or that which, dives. 2. Fig.: One who goes deeply into a subject, study, or business. 3. Any bird of certain genera, as Urinator (formerly Colymbus), or the allied genus Colymbus, or Podiceps, remarkable for their agility in diving.
Dives (n.) The name popularly given to the rich man in our Lord's parable of the ""Rich Man and Lazarus"" (Luke xvi. 19-31). Hence, a name for a rich worldling.
Divot (n.) A thin, oblong turf used for covering cottages, and also for fuel.
Dixie (n.) A colloquial name for the Southern portion of the United States, esp. during the Civil War.
Dodge (n.) The act of evading by some skillful movement; a sudden starting aside; hence, an artful device to evade, deceive, or cheat; a cunning trick; an artifice.
Dogma (n.) A formally stated and authoritatively settled doctrine; a definite, established, and authoritative tenet.
Doily (n.) A small napkin, used at table with the fruit, etc.; -- commonly colored and fringed.
Doing (n.) Anything done; a deed; an action good or bad; hence, in the plural, conduct; behavior. See Do.
Dolly (n.) A contrivance, turning on a vertical axis by a handle or winch, and giving a circular motion to the ore to be washed; a stirrer. 2. In pile driving, a block interposed between the head of the pile and the ram of the driver. 3. A small truck with a single wide roller used for moving heavy beams, columns, etc., in bridge building. 4. A compact, narrow-gauge locomotive used for moving construction trains, switching, etc.
Dolus (n.) Evil intent, embracing both malice and fraud. See Culpa.
Donax (n.) A canelike grass of southern Europe (Arundo Donax), used for fishing rods, etc.
Donee (n.) Anciently, one to whom lands were given; in later use, one to whom lands and tenements are given in tail; in modern use, one on whom a power is conferred for execution; -- sometimes called the appointor.
Donor (n.) One who grants an estate; in later use, one who confers a power; -- the opposite of donee.
Dooly (n.) A kind of litter suspended from men's shoulders, for carrying persons or things; a palanquin.
Doree (n.) A European marine fish (Zeus faber), of a yellow color. See Illust. of John Doree.
Dorse (n.) Same as dorsal, n. 2. The Baltic or variable cod (Gadus callarias), by some believed to be the young of the common codfish.
Dosel (n.) Same as Dorsal, n.
Doter (n.) One excessively fond, or weak in love.
Dough (n.) Paste of bread; a soft mass of moistened flour or meal, kneaded or unkneaded, but not yet baked; as, to knead dough.
Dowdy (n.) An awkward, vulgarly dressed, inelegant woman.
Dowel (n.) A pin, or block, of wood or metal, fitting into holes in the abutting portions of two pieces, and being partly in one piece and partly in the other, to keep them in their proper relative position. 2. A piece of wood driven into a wall, so that other pieces may be nailed to it.
Dower (n.) That portion of the real estate of a man which his widow enjoys during her life, or to which a woman is entitled after the death of her husband.
Dowry (n.) The money, goods, or estate, which a woman brings to her husband in marriage; a bride's portion on her marriage. See Note under Dower. 2. A gift or presents for the bride, on espousal. See Dower.
Draco (n.) The Dragon, a northern constellation within which is the north pole of the ecliptic. 2. A genus of lizards. See Dragon, 6.
Draff (n.) The act of drawing; also, the thing drawn. Same as Draught. 2. A selecting or detaching of soldiers from an army, or from any part of it, or from a military post; also from any district, or any company or collection of persons, or from the people at large; also, the body of men thus drafted. 3. An order from one person or party to another, directing the payment of money; a bill of exchange. 4. A drawing of lines for a plan; a plan delineated, or drawn in outline; a delineation. See Draught. 5. The form of any writing as first drawn up; the first rough sketch of written composition, to be filled in, or completed. See Draught. 6. A narrow border left on a finished stone, worked differently from the rest of its face. 7. A narrow border worked to a plane surface along the edge of a stone, or across its face, as a guide to the stone-cutter.
Drain (n.) The act of draining, or of drawing off; gradual and continuous outflow or withdrawal; as, the drain of specie from a country. 2. The grain from the mashing tub; as, brewers' drains.
Drake (n.) Wild oats, brome grass, or darnel grass; -- called also drawk, dravick, and drank.
Drama (n.) A composition, in prose or poetry, accommodated to action, and intended to exhibit a picture of human life, or to depict a series of grave or humorous actions of more than ordinary interest, tending toward some striking result. It is commonly designed to be spoken and represented by actors on the stage.
Drank (n.) Wild oats, or darnel grass. See Drake a plant.
Drawl (n.) A lengthened, slow monotonous utterance.
Dread (n.) Doubt; as, out of dread.
Dream (n.) The thoughts, or series of thoughts, or imaginary transactions, which occupy the mind during sleep; a sleeping vision. 2. A visionary scheme; a wild conceit; an idle fancy; a vagary; a revery; -- in this sense, applied to an imaginary or anticipated state of happiness; as, a dream of bliss; the dream of his youth. 3. To have ideas or images in the mind while in the state of sleep; to experience sleeping visions; -- often with of; as, to dream of a battle, or of an absent friend.
Dress (n.) A lady's gown; as, silk or a velvet dress. 2. Attention to apparel, or skill in adjusting it.
Drier (n.) One who, or that which, dries; that which may expel or absorb moisture; a desiccative; as, the sun and a northwesterly wind are great driers of the earth.
Drift (n.) The tendency of an act, argument, course of conduct, or the like; object aimed at or intended; intention; hence, also, import or meaning of a sentence or discourse; aim. 2. That which is driven, forced, or urged along 3. A mass of matter which has been driven or forced onward together in a body, or thrown together in a heap, etc., esp. by wind or water; as, a drift of snow, of ice, of sand, and the like. 4. A drove or flock, as of cattle, sheep, birds. 5. A collection of loose earth and rocks, or boulders, which have been distributed over large portions of the earth's surface, especially in latitudes north of forty degrees, by the agency of ice. 6. In South Africa, a ford in a river. 7. A slightly tapered tool of steel for enlarging or shaping a hole in metal, by being forced or driven into or through it; a broach. 8. A tool used in driving down compactly the composition contained in a rocket, or like firework. 9. A deviation from the line of fire, peculiar to oblong projectiles. 10. The angle which the line of a ship's motion makes with the meridian, in drifting. 11. The distance to which a vessel is carried off from her desired course by the wind, currents, or other causes. 12. The place in a deep-waisted vessel where the sheer is raised and the rail is cut off, and usually terminated with a scroll, or driftpiece. 13. The difference between the size of a bolt and the hole into which it is driven, or between the circumference of a hoop and that of the mast on which it is to be driven.
Drill (n.) An instrument with an edged or pointed end used for making holes in hard substances; strictly, a tool that cuts with its end, by revolving, as in drilling metals, or by a succession of blows, as in drilling stone; also, a drill press. 2. The act or exercise of training soldiers in the military art, as in the manual of arms, in the execution of evolutions, and the like; hence, diligent and strict instruction and exercise in the rudiments and methods of any business; a kind or method of military exercises; as, infantry drill; battalion drill; artillery drill. 3. Any exercise, physical or mental, enforced with regularity and by constant repetition; as, a severe drill in Latin grammar. 4. A marine gastropod, of several species, which kills oysters and other bivalves by drilling holes through the shell. The most destructive kind is Urosalpinx cinerea. 5. An implement for making holes for sowing seed, and sometimes so formed as to contain seeds and drop them into the hole made.
Drink (n.) Liquid to be swallowed; any fluid to be taken into the stomach for quenching thirst or for other purposes, as water, coffee, or decoctions. 2. Specifically, intoxicating liquor; as, when drink is on, wit is out.
Drive (n.) The act of driving; a trip or an excursion in a carriage, as for exercise or pleasure; -- distinguished from a ride taken on horseback. 2. Violent or rapid motion; a rushing onward or away; esp., a forced or hurried dispatch of business. 3. In type founding and forging, an impression or matrix, formed by a punch drift.
Droit (n.) A right; law in its aspect of the foundation of rights; also, in old law, the writ of right.
Droll (n.) Something exhibited to raise mirth or sport, as a puppet, a farce, and the like.
Drome (n.) The crab plover (Dromas ardeola), a peculiar North African bird, allied to the oyster catcher.
Drone (n.) To utter or make a low, dull, monotonous, humming or murmuring sound.
Droop (n.) A drooping; as, a droop of the eye.
Dross (n.) The scum or refuse matter which is thrown off, or falls from, metals in smelting the ore, or in the process of melting; recrement.
Drove (n.) A collection of cattle driven, or cattle collected for driving; a number of animals, as oxen, sheep, or swine, driven in a body. 2. Any collection of irrational animals, moving or driving forward; as, a finny drove.
Druid (n.) One of an order of priests which in ancient times existed among certain branches of the Celtic race, especially among the Gauls and Britons. 2. A member of a social and benevolent order, founded in London in 1781, and professedly based on the traditions of the ancient Druids. Lodges or groves of the society are established in other countries.
Drupe (n.) A fruit consisting of pulpy, coriaceous, or fibrous exocarp, without valves, containing a nut or stone with a kernel. The exocarp is succulent in the plum, cherry, apricot, peach, etc.; dry and subcoriaceous in the almond; and fibrous in the cocoanut.
Druse (n.) A cavity in a rock, having its interior surface studded with crystals and sometimes filled with water; a geode.
Ducat (n.) A coin, either of gold or silver, of several countries in Europe; originally, one struck in the dominions of a duke.
Duelo (n.) A duel; also, the rules of dueling.
Dulia (n.) An inferior kind of veneration or worship, given to the angels and saints as the servants of God.
Dulse (n.) A seaweed of a reddish brown color, which is sometimes eaten, as in Scotland. The true dulse is Sarcophyllis edulis; the common is Rhodymenia. [Written also dillisk.]
Dummy (n.) A sham package in a shop, or one which does not contain what its exterior indicates. 2. An imitation or copy of something, to be used as a substitute; a model; a lay figure; as, a figure on which clothing is exhibited in shop windows; a blank paper copy used to show the size of the future book, etc. 3. A locomotive with condensing engines, and, hence, without the noise of escaping steam; also, a dummy car.
Duomo (n.) A cathedral. See Dome, 2.
Durio (n.) A fruit tree (D. zibethinus, the only species known) of the Indian Archipelago. It bears the durian.
Durra (n.) A kind of millet, cultivated throughout Asia, and introduced into the south of Europe; a variety of Sorghum vulgare; -- called also Indian millet, and Guinea corn.
Dwang (n.) A piece of wood set between two studs, posts, etc., to stiffen and support them.
Dwarf (n.) An animal or plant which is much below the ordinary size of its species or kind; especially, a diminutive human being.
Dyaks (n. pl.) The aboriginal and most numerous inhabitants of Borneo. They are partially civilized, but retain many barbarous practices.
Eagle (n.) Any large, rapacious bird of the Falcon family, esp. of the genera Aquila and Haliaeetus. The eagle is remarkable for strength, size, graceful figure, keenness of vision, and extraordinary flight. The most noted species are the golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetus); the imperial eagle of Europe (A. mogilnik / imperialis); the American bald eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus); the European sea eagle (H. albicilla); and the great harpy eagle (Thrasaetus harpyia). The figure of the eagle, as the king of birds, is commonly used as an heraldic emblem, and also for standards and emblematic devices. See Bald eagle, Harpy, and Golden eagle. 2. A gold coin of the United States, of the value of ten dollars. 3. A northern constellation, containing Altair, a star of the first magnitude. See Aquila. 4. The figure of an eagle borne as an emblem on the standard of the ancient Romans, or so used upon the seal or standard of any people.
Eagre (n.) A wave, or two or three successive waves, of great height and violence, at flood tide moving up an estuary or river; -- commonly called the bore. See Bore.
Earth (n.) The globe or planet which we inhabit; the world, in distinction from the sun, moon, or stars. Also, this world as the dwelling place of mortals, in distinction from the dwelling place of spirits. 2. The solid materials which make up the globe, in distinction from the air or water; the dry land. 3. The softer inorganic matter composing part of the surface of the globe, in distinction from the firm rock; soil of all kinds, including gravel, clay, loam, and the like; sometimes, soil favorable to the growth of plants; the visible surface of the globe; the ground; as, loose earth; rich earth. 4. Worldly things, as opposed to spiritual things; the pursuits, interests, and allurements of this life. 5. Any earthy-looking metallic oxide, as alumina, glucina, zirconia, yttria, and thoria. 6. A similar oxide, having a slight alkaline reaction, as lime, magnesia, strontia, baryta. 7. A hole in the ground, where an animal hides himself; as, the earth of a fox.
Easel (n.) A frame (commonly) of wood serving to hold a canvas upright, or nearly upright, for the painter's convenience or for exhibition.
Eater (n.) One who, or that which, eats.
Eaves (n. pl.) The edges or lower borders of the roof of a building, which overhang the walls, and cast off the water that falls on the roof.
Ebony (n.) A hard, heavy, and durable wood, which admits of a fine polish or gloss. The usual color is black, but it also occurs red or green.
Eccle (n.) The European green woodpecker; -- also called ecall, eaquall, yaffle.
Edder (n.) Flexible wood worked into the top of hedge stakes, to bind them together.
Edict (n.) A public command or ordinance by the sovereign power; the proclamation of a law made by an absolute authority, as if by the very act of announcement; a decree; as, the edicts of the Roman emperors; the edicts of the French monarch.
Educt (n.) That which is educed, as by analysis.
Effet (n.) The common newt; -- called also asker, eft, evat, and ewt.
Eggar (n.) Any bombycid moth of the genera Eriogaster and Lasiocampa; as, the oak eggar (L. roboris) of Europe.
Egret (n.) The name of several species of herons which bear plumes on the back. They are generally white. Among the best known species are the American egret (Ardea, / Herodias, egretta); the great egret (A. alba); the little egret (A. garzetta), of Europe; and the American snowy egret (A. candidissima). 2. A plume or tuft of feathers worn as a part of a headdress, or anything imitating such an ornament; an aigrette. 3. The flying feathery or hairy crown of seeds or achenes, as the down of the thistle.
Eider (n.) Any species of sea duck of the genus Somateria, esp. Somateria mollissima, which breeds in the northern parts of Europe and America, and lines its nest with fine down (taken from its own body) which is an article of commerce; -- called also eider duck. The American eider (S. Dresseri), the king eider (S. spectabilis), and the spectacled eider (Arctonetta Fischeri) are related species.
Eight (n.) A symbol representing eight units, as 8 or viii.
Eikon (n.) An image or effigy; -- used rather in an abstract sense, and rarely for a work of art.
Eirie (n.) See Aerie, and Eyrie.
Eland (n.) A species of large South African antelope (Oreas canna). It is valued both for its hide and flesh, and is rapidly disappearing in the settled districts; -- called also Cape elk.
Elaps (n.) A genus of venomous snakes found both in America and the Old World. Many species are known. See Coral snake, under Coral.
Elbow (n.) Any turn or bend like that of the elbow, in a wall, building, and the like; a sudden turn in a line of coast or course of a river; also, an angular or jointed part of any structure, as the raised arm of a chair or sofa, or a short pipe fitting, turning at an angle or bent. 2. A sharp angle in any surface of wainscoting or other woodwork; the upright sides which flank any paneled work, as the sides of windows, where the jamb makes an elbow with the window back.
Elder (n.) A genus of shrubs (Sambucus) having broad umbels of white flowers, and small black or red berries.
Elemi (n.) A fragrant gum resin obtained chiefly from tropical trees of the genera Amyris and Canarium. A. elemifera yields Mexican elemi; C. commune, the Manila elemi. It is used in the manufacture of varnishes, also in ointments and plasters.
Elite (n.) A choice or select body; the flower; as, the elite of society.
Ember (n.) A lighted coal, smoldering amid ashes; -- used chiefly in the plural, to signify mingled coals and ashes; the smoldering remains of a fire.
Emery (n.) Corundum in the form of grains or powder, used in the arts for grinding and polishing hard substances. Native emery is mixed with more or less magnetic iron. See the Note under Corundum.
Emeer (n.) An Arabian military commander, independent chieftain, or ruler of a province; also, an honorary title given to the descendants of Mohammed, in the line of his daughter Fatima; among the Turks, likewise, a title of dignity, given to certain high officials.
Empty (n.) An empty box, crate, cask, etc.; -- used in commerce, esp. in transportation of freight; as, ""special rates for empties.""
Ender (n.) One who, or that which, makes an end of something; as, the ender of my life.
Enema (n.) An injection, or clyster, thrown into the rectum as a medicine, or to impart nourishment.
Enemy (n.) One hostile to another; one who hates, and desires or attempts the injury of, another; a foe; an adversary; as, an enemy of or to a person; an enemy to truth, or to falsehood.
Ennui (n.) A feeling of weariness and disgust; dullness and languor of spirits, arising from satiety or want of interest; tedium.
Entry (n.) The act of entering or passing into or upon; entrance; ingress; hence, beginnings or first attempts; as, the entry of a person into a house or city; the entry of a river into the sea; the entry of air into the blood; an entry upon an undertaking. 2. The act of making or entering a record; a setting down in writing the particulars, as of a transaction; as, an entry of a sale; also, that which is entered; an item. 3. That by which entrance is made; a passage leading into a house or other building, or to a room; a vestibule; an adit, as of a mine. 4. The exhibition or depositing of a ship's papers at the customhouse, to procure license to land goods; or the giving an account of a ship's cargo to the officer of the customs, and obtaining his permission to land the goods. See Enter, v. t., 8, and Entrance, n., 5. 5. The actual taking possession of lands or tenements, by entering or setting foot on them.
Envoy (n.) One dispatched upon an errand or mission; a messenger; esp., a person deputed by a sovereign or a government to negotiate a treaty, or transact other business, with a foreign sovereign or government; a minister accredited to a foreign government. An envoy's rank is below that of an ambassador. 2. An explanatory or commendatory postscript to a poem, essay, or book; -- also in the French from, l'envoi.
Eosin (n.) A yellow or brownish red dyestuff obtained by the action of bromine on fluorescein, and named from the fine rose-red which it imparts to silk. It is also used for making a fine red ink. Its solution is fluorescent.
Epact (n.) The moon's age at the beginning of the calendar year, or the number of days by which the last new moon has preceded the beginning of the year.
Ephod (n.) A part of the sacerdotal habit among Jews, being a covering for the back and breast, held together on the shoulders by two clasps or brooches of onyx stones set in gold, and fastened by a girdle of the same stuff as the ephod. The ephod for the priests was of plain linen; that for the high priest was richly embroidered in colors. The breastplate of the high priest was worn upon the ephod in front.
Epoch (n.) A fixed point of time, established in history by the occurrence of some grand or remarkable event; a point of time marked by an event of great subsequent influence; as, the epoch of the creation; the birth of Christ was the epoch which gave rise to the Christian era. 2. A period of time, longer or shorter, remarkable for events of great subsequent influence; a memorable period; as, the epoch of maritime discovery, or of the Reformation. 3. An arbitrary fixed date, for which the elements used in computing the place of a planet, or other heavenly body, at any other date, are given; as, the epoch of Mars; lunar elements for the epoch March 1st, 1860.
Epode (n.) The after song; the part of a lyric ode which follows the strophe and antistrophe, -- the ancient ode being divided into strophe, antistrophe, and epode. 2. A species of lyric poem, invented by Archilochus, in which a longer verse is followed by a shorter one; as, the Epodes of Horace. It does not include the elegiac distich.
Epure (n.) A draught or model from which to build; especially, one of the full size of the work to be done; a detailed drawing.
Equal (n.) One not inferior or superior to another; one having the same or a similar age, rank, station, office, talents, strength, or other quality or condition; an equal quantity or number; as, ""If equals be taken from equals the remainders are equal.""
Equus (n.) A genus of mammals, including the horse, ass, etc.
Ergot (n.) A diseased condition of rye and other cereals, in which the grains become black, and often spur-shaped. It is caused by a parasitic fungus, Claviceps purpurea. 2. The mycelium or spawn of this fungus infecting grains of rye and wheat. It is a powerful remedial agent, and also a dangerous poison, and is used as a means of hastening childbirth, and to arrest bleeding. 3. A stub, like soft horn, about the size of a chestnut, situated behind and below the pastern joint. 4. See 2d Calcar, 3 (b).
Erica (n.) A genus of shrubby plants, including the heaths, many of them producing beautiful flowers.
Error (n.) A wandering or deviation from the right course or standard; irregularity; mistake; inaccuracy; something made wrong or left wrong; as, an error in writing or in printing; a clerical error. 2. A fault of a player of the side in the field which results in failure to put out a player on the other side, or gives him an unearned base.
Escot (n.) See Scot, a tax.
Essay (n.) An effort made, or exertion of body or mind, for the performance of anything; a trial; attempt; as, to make an essay to benefit a friend. 2. A composition treating of any particular subject; -- usually shorter and less methodical than a formal, finished treatise; as, an essay on the life and writings of Homer; an essay on fossils, or on commerce. 3. An assay. See Assay, n.
Ester (n.) An ethereal salt, or compound ether, consisting of an organic radical united with the residue of any oxygen acid, organic or inorganic; thus the natural fats are esters of glycerin and the fatty acids, oleic, etc.
Ethal (n.) A white waxy solid, C16H33.OH; -- called also cetylic alcohol. See Cetylic alcohol, under Cetylic.
Ether (n.) A medium of great elasticity and extreme tenuity, supposed to pervade all space, the interior of solid bodies not excepted, and to be the medium of transmission of light and heat; hence often called luminiferous ether. 2. A light, volatile, mobile, inflammable liquid, (C2H5)2O, of a characteristic aromatic odor, obtained by the distillation of alcohol with sulphuric acid, and hence called also sulphuric ether. It is powerful solvent of fats, resins, and pyroxylin, but finds its chief use as an anaesthetic. Called also ethyl oxide. 3. Any similar oxide of hydrocarbon radicals; as, amyl ether; valeric ether.
Ethyl (n.) A monatomic, hydrocarbon radical, C2H5 of the paraffin series, forming the essential radical of ethane, and of common alcohol and ether.
Etude (n.) A composition in the fine arts which is intended, or may serve, for a study.
Event (n.) That which comes, arrives, or happens; that which falls out; any incident, good or bad. 2. The consequence of anything; the issue; conclusion; result; that in which an action, operation, or series of operations, terminates.
Exile (n.) Forced separation from one's native country; expulsion from one's home by the civil authority; banishment; sometimes, voluntary separation from one's native country. 2. The person expelled from his country by authority; also, one who separates himself from his home.
Exode (n.) Departure; exodus; esp., the exodus of the Israelites from Egypt. 2. An afterpiece of a comic description, either a farce or a travesty.
Extra (n.) Something in addition to what is due, expected, or customary; something in addition to the regular charge or compensation, or for which an additional charge is made; as, at European hotels lights are extras.
Eyren (n. pl.) See Ey, an egg.
Fable (n.) A Feigned story or tale, intended to instruct or amuse; a fictitious narration intended to enforce some useful truth or precept; an apologue. See the Note under Apologue. 2. The plot, story, or connected series of events, forming the subject of an epic or dramatic poem.
Faser (n.) A blow in the face, as in boxing; hence, any severe or stunning check or defeat, as in controversy.
Facet (n.) A little face; a small, plane surface; as, the facets of a diamond. 2. A smooth circumscribed surface; as, the articular facet of a bone.
Fadge (n.) A small flat loaf or thick cake; also, a fagot.
Fagot (n.) A bundle of sticks, twigs, or small branches of trees, used for fuel, for raising batteries, filling ditches, or other purposes in fortification; a fascine.
Faham (n.) The leaves of an orchid (Angraecum fragrans), of the islands of Bourbon and Mauritius, used (in France) as a substitute for Chinese tea.
Faint (n.) The act of fainting, or the state of one who has fainted; a swoon. [R.] See Fainting, n.
Fairy (n.) An imaginary supernatural being or spirit, supposed to assume a human form (usually diminutive), either male or female, and to meddle for good or evil in the affairs of mankind; a fay. See Elf, and Demon.
Faith (n.) Belief; the assent of the mind to the truth of what is declared by another, resting solely and implicitly on his authority and veracity; reliance on testimony. 2. The assent of the mind to the statement or proposition of another, on the ground of the manifest truth of what he utters; firm and earnest belief, on probable evidence of any kind, especially in regard to important moral truth. 3. The belief in the historic truthfulness of the Scripture narrative, and the supernatural origin of its teachings, sometimes called historical and speculative faith. 4. The belief in the facts and truth of the Scriptures, with a practical love of them; especially, that confiding and affectionate belief in the person and work of Christ, which affects the character and life, and makes a man a true Christian, -- called a practical, evangelical, or saving faith. 5. That which is believed on any subject, whether in science, politics, or religion; especially (Theol.), a system of religious belief of any kind; as, the Jewish or Mohammedan faith; and especially, the system of truth taught by Christ; as, the Christian faith; also, the creed or belief of a Christian society or church. 6. Fidelity to one's promises, or allegiance to duty, or to a person honored and beloved; loyalty. 7. Word or honor pledged; promise given; fidelity; as, he violated his faith.
Fanal (n.) A lighthouse, or the apparatus placed in it for giving light.
Fancy (n.) The faculty by which the mind forms an image or a representation of anything perceived before; the power of combining and modifying such objects into new pictures or images; the power of readily and happily creating and recalling such objects for the purpose of amusement, wit, or embellishment; imagination. 2. Inclination; liking, formed by caprice rather than reason; as, to strike one's fancy; hence, the object of inclination or liking.
Fanon (n.) A term applied to various articles, as: (a) A peculiar striped scarf worn by the pope at mass, and by eastern bishops. (b) A maniple.
Farad (n.) The standard unit of electrical capacity; the capacity of a condenser whose charge, having an electro-motive force of one volt, is equal to the amount of electricity which, with the same electromotive force, passes through one ohm in one second; the capacity, which, charged with one coulomb, gives an electro-motive force of one volt.
Farcy (n.) A contagious disease of horses, associated with painful ulcerating enlargements, esp. upon the head and limbs. It is of the same nature as glanders, and is often fatal. Called also farcin, and farcimen.
Farse (n.) An addition to, or a paraphrase of, some part of the Latin service in the vernacular; -- common in English before the Reformation.
Fasti (n.pl.) The Roman calendar, which gave the days for festivals, courts, etc., corresponding to a modern almanac.
Fault (n.) Anything that fails, that is wanting, or that impairs excellence; a failing; a defect; a blemish. 2. In coal seams, coal rendered worthless by impurities in the seam; as, slate fault, dirt fault, etc.
Fauna (n.) The animals of any given area or epoch; as, the fauna of America; fossil fauna; recent fauna.
Favas (n.) See Favus, n., 2.
Favor (n.) The act of countenancing, or the condition of being countenanced, or regarded propitiously; support; promotion; befriending. 2. A kind act or office; kindness done or granted; benevolence shown by word or deed; an act of grace or good will, as distinct from justice or remuneration. 3. A gift or represent; something bestowed as an evidence of good will; a token of love; a knot of ribbons; something worn as a token of affection; as, a marriage favor is a bunch or knot of white ribbons or white flowers worn at a wedding. 4. A letter or epistle; -- so called in civility or compliment; as, your favor of yesterday is received. 5. To regard with kindness; to support; to aid, or to have the disposition to aid, or to wish success to; to be propitious to; to countenance; to treat with consideration or tenderness; to show partiality or unfair bias towards. 6. To afford advantages for success to; to facilitate; as, a weak place favored the entrance of the enemy. 7. To resemble in features; to have the aspect or looks of; as, the child favors his father.
Favus (n.) A disease of the scalp, produced by a vegetable parasite. 2. A tile or flagstone cut into an hexagonal shape to produce a honeycomb pattern, as in a pavement; -- called also favas and sectila.
Feast (n.) A festival; a holiday; a solemn, or more commonly, a joyous, anniversary. 2. A festive or joyous meal; a grand, ceremonious, or sumptuous entertainment, of which many guests partake; a banquet characterized by tempting variety and abundance of food. 3. That which is partaken of, or shared in, with delight; something highly agreeable; entertainment. 4. To eat sumptuously; to dine or sup on rich provisions, particularly in large companies, and on public festivals.
Feere (n.) A consort, husband or wife; a companion; a fere.
Felis (n.) A genus of carnivorous mammals, including the domestic cat, the lion, tiger, panther, and similar animals.
Felly (n.) The exterior wooden rim, or a segment of the rim, of a wheel, supported by the spokes.
Femme (n.) A woman. See Feme, n.
Fence (n.) An inclosure about a field or other space, or about any object; especially, an inclosing structure of wood, iron, or other material, intended to prevent intrusion from without or straying from within. 2. A projection on the bolt, which passes through the tumbler gates in locking and unlocking. 3. Self-defense by the use of the sword; the art and practice of fencing and sword play; hence, skill in debate and repartee. See Fencing. 4. A receiver of stolen goods, or a place where they are received.
Fenks (n.) The refuse whale blubber, used as a manure, and in the manufacture of Prussian blue.
Ferae (n. pl.) A group of mammals which formerly included the Carnivora, Insectivora, Marsupialia, and lemurs, but is now often restricted to the Carnivora.
Feria (n.) A week day, esp. a day which is neither a festival nor a fast.
Ferme (n.) Rent for a farm; a farm; also, an abode; a place of residence; as, he let his land to ferm.
Fesse (n.) A band drawn horizontally across the center of an escutcheon, and containing in breadth the third part of it; one of the nine honorable ordinaries.
Fetch (n.) A stratagem by which a thing is indirectly brought to pass, or by which one thing seems intended and another is done; a trick; an artifice.
Fetor (n.) A strong, offensive smell; stench; fetidness.
Fetus (n.) The young or embryo of an animal in the womb, or in the egg; often restricted to the later stages in the development of viviparous and oviparous animals, embryo being applied to the earlier stages.
Fever (n.) A diseased state of the system, marked by increased heat, acceleration of the pulse, and a general derangement of the functions, including usually, thirst and loss of appetite. Many diseases, of which fever is the most prominent symptom, are denominated fevers; as, typhoid fever; yellow fever. 2. Excessive excitement of the passions in consequence of strong emotion; a condition of great excitement; as, this quarrel has set my blood in a fever.
Fibre (n.) One of the delicate, threadlike portions of which the tissues of plants and animals are in part constituted; as, the fiber of flax or of muscle. 2. Any fine, slender thread, or threadlike substance; as, a fiber of spun glass; especially, one of the slender rootlets of a plant. 3. Sinew; strength; toughness; as, a man of real fiber. 4. A general name for the raw material, such as cotton, flax, hemp, etc., used in textile manufactures.
Fichu (n.) A light cape, usually of lace, worn by women, to cover the neck and throat, and extending to the shoulders.
Ficus (n.) A genus of trees or shrubs, one species of which (F. Carica) produces the figs of commerce; the fig tree.
Fidia (n.) A genus of small beetles, of which one species (the grapevine Fidia, F. longipes) is very injurious to vines in America.
Field (n.) A piece of land of considerable size; esp., a piece inclosed for tillage or pasture. 2. A place where a battle is fought; also, the battle itself. 3. The whole surface of an escutcheon; also, so much of it is shown unconcealed by the different bearings upon it. See Illust. of Fess, where the field is represented as gules (red), while the fess is argent (silver). 4. An unresticted or favorable opportunity for action, operation, or achievement; province; room. 5. A collective term for all the competitors in any outdoor contest or trial, or for all except the favorites in the betting.
Fifth (n.) The interval of three tones and a semitone, embracing five diatonic degrees of the scale; the dominant of any key.
Fifty (n.) A symbol representing fifty units, as 50, or l.
Filly (n.) A female foal or colt; a young mare. Cf. Colt, Foal. 2. A lively, spirited young girl.
Finch (n.) A small singing bird of many genera and species, belonging to the family Fringillidae.
Finns (n. pl.) A branch of the Mongolian race, inhabiting Northern and Eastern Europe, including the Magyars, Bulgarians, Permians, Lapps, and Finlanders.
Fiord (n.) A narrow inlet of the sea, penetrating between high banks or rocks, as on the coasts of Norway and Alaska.
First (n.) The upper part of a duet, trio, etc., either vocal or instrumental; -- so called because it generally expresses the air, and has a preeminence in the combined effect.
Fitch (n.) A word found in the Authorized Version of the Bible, representing different Hebrew originals. In Isaiah xxviii. 25, 27, it means the black aromatic seeds of Nigella sativa, still used as a flavoring in the East. In Ezekiel iv. 9, the Revised Version now reads spelt. 2. The European polecat; also, its fur.
Fives (n. pl.) A kind of play with a ball against a wall, resembling tennis; -- so named because three fives, or fifteen, are counted to the game.
Flail (n.) An instrument for threshing or beating grain from the ear by hand, consisting of a wooden staff or handle, at the end of which a stouter and shorter pole or club, called a swipe, is so hung as to swing freely. 2. An ancient military weapon, like the common flail, often having the striking part armed with rows of spikes, or loaded.
Flake (n.) A platform of hurdles, or small sticks made fast or interwoven, supported by stanchions, for drying codfish and other things. 2. A small stage hung over a vessel's side, for workmen to stand on in calking, etc. 3. A loose filmy mass or a thin chiplike layer of anything; a film; flock; lamina; layer; scale; as, a flake of snow, tallow, or fish. 4. A little particle of lighted or incandescent matter, darted from a fire; a flash. 5. A sort of carnation with only two colors in the flower, the petals having large stripes.
Flame (n.) A stream of burning vapor or gas, emitting light and heat; darting or streaming fire; a blaze; a fire.
Flank (n.) The fleshy or muscular part of the side of an animal, between the ribs and the hip. See Illust. of Beef. 2. The side of an army, or of any division of an army, as of a brigade, regiment, or battalion; the extreme right or left; as, to attack an enemy in flank is to attack him on the side. 3. That part of a bastion which reaches from the curtain to the face, and defends the curtain, the flank and face of the opposite bastion; any part of a work defending another by a fire along the outside of its parapet.
Flare (n.) An unsteady, broad, offensive light. 2. A spreading outward; as, the flare of a fireplace.
Flash (n.) A sudden burst of light; a flood of light instantaneously appearing and disappearing; a momentary blaze; as, a flash of lightning. 2. A sudden and brilliant burst, as of wit or genius; a momentary brightness or show. 3. A preparation of capsicum, burnt sugar, etc., for coloring and giving a fictious strength to liquors. 4. A reservoir and sluiceway beside a navigable stream, just above a shoal, so that the stream may pour in water as boats pass, and thus bear them over the shoal.
Flask (n.) A small bottle-shaped vessel for holding fluids; as, a flask of oil or wine. 2. A narrow-necked vessel of metal or glass, used for various purposes; as of sheet metal, to carry gunpowder in; or of wrought iron, to contain quicksilver; or of glass, to heat water in, etc. 3. The wooden or iron frame which holds the sand, etc., forming the mold used in a foundry; it consists of two or more parts; viz., the cope or top; sometimes, the cheeks, or middle part; and the drag, or bottom part. When there are one or more cheeks, the flask is called a three part flask, four part flask, etc.
Fleam (n.) A sharp instrument used for opening veins, lancing gums, etc.; a kind of lancet.
Fleck (n.) A flake; also, a lock, as of wool.
Flesh (n.) The aggregate of the muscles, fat, and other tissues which cover the framework of bones in man and other animals; especially, the muscles. 2. Animal food, in distinction from vegetable; meat; especially, the body of beasts and birds used as food, as distinguished from fish. 3. The human body, as distinguished from the soul; the corporeal person. 4. In a good sense, tenderness of feeling; gentleness. 5. In a bad sense, tendency to transient or physical pleasure; desire for sensual gratification; carnality. 6. The soft, pulpy substance of fruit; also, that part of a root, fruit, and the like, which is fit to be eaten.
Flews (n. pl.) The pendulous or overhanging lateral parts of the upper lip of dogs, especially prominent in hounds; -- called also chaps. See Illust. of Bloodhound.
Flick (n.) A flitch; as, a flick of bacon.
Flier (n.) See Flyer, n., 5. 2. See Flyer, n., 4.
Fling (n.) A cast from the hand; a throw; also, a flounce; a kick; as, the fling of a horse. 2. A kind of dance; as, the Highland fling.
Flint (n.) A massive, somewhat impure variety of quartz, in color usually of a gray to brown or nearly black, breaking with a conchoidal fracture and sharp edge. It is very hard, and strikes fire with steel. 2. A piece of flint for striking fire; -- formerly much used, esp. in the hammers of gun locks. 3. Anything extremely hard, unimpressible, and unyielding, like flint.
Flirt (n.) A sudden jerk; a quick throw or cast; a darting motion; hence, a jeer.
Float (n.) To move quietly or gently on the water, as a raft; to drift along; to move or glide without effort or impulse on the surface of a fluid, or through the air.
Flock (n.) A company or collection of living creatures; -- especially applied to sheep and birds, rarely to persons or (except in the plural) to cattle and other large animals; as, a flock of ravenous fowl. 2. A Christian church or congregation; considered in their relation to the pastor, or minister in charge. 3. Woolen or cotton refuse (sing. / pl.), old rags, etc., reduced to a degree of fineness by machinery, and used for stuffing unpholstered furniture.
Floor (n.) The structure formed of beams, girders, etc., with proper covering, which divides a building horizontally into stories. Floor in sense 1 is, then, the upper surface of floor in sense 2. 2. The surface, or the platform, of a structure on which we walk or travel; as, the floor of a bridge. 3. A horizontal, flat ore body.
Flora (n.) The complete system of vegetable species growing without cultivation in a given locality, region, or period; a list or description of, or treatise on, such plants.
Floss (n.) Untwisted filaments of silk, used in embroidering. 2. Fluid glass floating on iron in the puddling furnace, produced by the vitrification of oxides and earths which are present.
Flota (n.) A fleet; especially, a /eet of Spanish ships which formerly sailed every year from Cadiz to Vera Cruz, in Mexico, to transport to Spain the production of Spanish America.
Flour (n.) The finely ground meal of wheat, or of any other grain; especially, the finer part of meal separated by bolting; hence, the fine and soft powder of any substance; as, flour of emery; flour of mustard.
Fluff (n.) Nap or down; flue; soft, downy feathers.
Fluke (n.) A parasitic trematode worm of several species, having a flat, lanceolate body and two suckers. Two species (Fasciola hepatica and Distoma lanceolatum) are found in the livers of sheep, and produce the disease called rot. 2. One of the lobes of a whale's tail, so called from the resemblance to the fluke of an anchor. 3. An accidental and favorable stroke at billiards (called a scratch in the United States); hence, any accidental or unexpected advantage; as, he won by a fluke.
Flume (n.) A stream; especially, a passage channel, or conduit for the water that drives a mill wheel; or an artifical channel of water for hydraulic or placer mining; also, a chute for conveying logs or lumber down a declivity.
Flush (n.) A sudden flowing; a rush which fills or overflows, as of water for cleansing purposes. 2. A suffusion of the face with blood, as from fear, shame, modesty, or intensity of feeling of any kind; a blush; a glow. 3. Any tinge of red color like that produced on the cheeks by a sudden rush of blood; as, the flush on the side of a peach; the flush on the clouds at sunset. 4. A sudden flood or rush of feeling; a thrill of excitement. animation, etc.; as, a flush of joy.
Flute (n.) A similar channel or groove made in wood or other material, esp. in plaited cloth, as in a lady's ruffle. 2. A stop in an organ, having a flutelike sound.
Flyer (n.) The fly of a flag: See Fly, n., 6. 2. Anything that is scattered abroad in great numbers as a theatrical programme, an advertising leaf, etc. 3. One in a flight of steps which are parallel to each other(as in ordinary stairs), as distinguished from a winder. 4. The pair of arms attached to the spindle of a spinning frame, over which the thread passes to the bobbin; -- so called from their swift revolution. See Fly, n., 11. 5. A small operation not involving ? considerable part of one's capital, or not in the line of one's ordinary business; a venture.
Focus (n.) A point in which the rays of light meet, after being reflected or refrcted, and at which the image is formed; as, the focus of a lens or mirror.
Folio (n.) A book made of sheets of paper each folded once (four pages to the sheet); hence, a book of the largest kind. See Note under Paper. 2. A page of a book; (Bookkeeping) a page in an account book; sometimes, two opposite pages bearing the same serial number. 3. A leaf containing a certain number of words, hence, a certain number of words in a writing, as in England, in law proceedings 72, and in chancery, 90; in New York, 100 words.
Folks (n. collect. & pl.) In Anglo-Saxon times, the people of a group of townships or villages; a community; a tribe. 2. ollect. & pl.) People in general, or a separate class of people; -- generally used in the plural form, and often with a qualifying adjective; as, the old folks; poor folks. 3. ollect. & pl.) The persons of one's own family; as, our folks are all well.
Folly (n.) The state of being foolish; want of good sense; levity, weakness, or derangement of mind. 2. Scandalous crime; sin; specifically, as applied to a woman, wantonness.
Fomes (n.) Any substance supposed to be capable of absorbing, retaining, and transporting contagious or infectious germs; as, woolen clothes are said to be active fomites.
Foots (n. pl.) The settlings of oil, molasses, etc., at the bottom of a barrel or hogshead.
Foray (n.) A sudden or irregular incursion in border warfare; hence, any irregular incursion for war or spoils; a raid.
Force (n.) Strength or energy of body or mind; active power; vigor; might; often, an unusual degree of strength or energy; capacity of exercising an influence or producing an effect; especially, power to persuade, or convince, or impose obligation; pertinency; validity; special signification; as, the force of an appeal, an argument, a contract, or a term. 2. Strength or power for war; hence, a body of land or naval combatants, with their appurtenances, ready for action; -- an armament; troops; warlike array; -- often in the plural; hence, a body of men prepared for action in other ways; as, the laboring force of a plantation. 3. Strength or power exercised without law, or contrary to law, upon persons or things; violence. 4. Any action between two bodies which changes, or tends to change, their relative condition as to rest or motion; or, more generally, which changes, or tends to change, any physical relation between them, whether mechanical, thermal, chemical, electrical, magnetic, or of any other kind; as, the force of gravity; cohesive force; centrifugal force. 5. To constrain to do or to forbear, by the exertion of a power not resistible; to compel by physical, moral, or intellectual means; to coerce; as, masters force slaves to labor. 6. To compel, as by strength of evidence; as, to force conviction on the mind. 7. To do violence to; to overpower, or to compel by violence to one;s will; especially, to ravish; to violate; to commit rape upon. 8. To obtain or win by strength; to take by violence or struggle; specifically, to capture by assault; to storm, as a fortress. 9. To impel, drive, wrest, extort, get, etc., by main strength or violence; -- with a following adverb, as along, away, from, into, through, out, etc. 10. To exert to the utmost; to urge; hence, to strain; to urge to excessive, unnatural, or untimely action; to produce by unnatural effort; as, to force a consient or metaphor; to force a laugh; to force fruits.
Forge (n.) A place or establishment where iron or other metals are wrought by heating and hammering; especially, a furnace, or a shop with its furnace, etc., where iron is heated and wrought; a smithy. 2. The works where wrought iron is produced directly from the ore, or where iron is rendered malleable by puddling and shingling; a shingling mill. 3. To form by heating and hammering; to beat into any particular shape, as a metal. 4. To make falsely; to produce, as that which is untrue or not genuine; to fabricate; to counterfeit, as, a signature, or a signed document.
Forty (n.) A symbol expressing forty units; as, 40, or xl.
Forum (n.) A market place or public place in Rome, where causes were judicially tried, and orations delivered to the people.
Fossa (n.) A pit, groove, cavity, or depression, of greater or less depth; as, the temporal fossa on the side of the skull; the nasal fossae containing the nostrils in most birds.
Found (n.) A thin, single-cut file for combmakers.
Foxes (n. pl.) See Fox, n., 7.
Frail (n.) A basket made of rushes, used chiefly for containing figs and raisins. 2. The quantity of raisins -- about thirty-two, fifty-six, or seventy-five pounds, -- contained in a frail.
Frame (n.) Anything composed of parts fitted and united together; a fabric; a structure; esp., the constructional system, whether of timber or metal, that gives to a building, vessel, etc., its model and strength; the skeleton of a structure. 2. A kind of open case or structure made for admitting, inclosing, or supporting things, as that which incloses or contains a window, door, picture, etc.; that on which anything is held or stretched 3. A molding box or flask, which being filled with sand serves as a mold for castings. 4. A structure of four bars, adjustable in size, on which cloth, etc., is stretched for quilting, embroidery, etc. 5. A term applied, especially in England, to certain machines built upon or within framework; as, a stocking frame; lace frame; spinning frame, etc. 6. Form; shape; proportion; scheme; structure; constitution; system; as, a frameof government. 7. Particular state or disposition, as of the mind; humor; temper; mood; as, to be always in a happy frame.
Frank (n.) Unbounded by restrictions, limitations, etc.; free. 2. Free in uttering one's real sentiments; not reserved; using no disguise; candid; ingenuous; as, a frank nature, conversation, manner, etc.
Frape (n.) A crowd, a rabble.
Freer (n.) One who frees, or sets free.
Fresh (n.) The mingling of fresh water with salt in rivers or bays, as by means of a flood of fresh water flowing toward or into the sea.
Frett (n.) The worn side of the bank of a river. See 4th Fret, n., 4. 2. A vitreous compound, used by potters in glazing, consisting of lime, silica, borax, lead, and soda.
Freya (n.) The daughter of Njord, and goddess of love and beauty; the Scandinavian Venus; -- in Teutonic myths confounded with Frigga, but in Scandinavian, distinct.
Friar (n.) A brother or member of any religious order, but especially of one of the four mendicant orders, viz: (a) Minors, Gray Friars, or Franciscans. (b) Augustines. (c) Dominicans or Black Friars. (d) White Friars or Carmelites. See these names in the Vocabulary.
Frith (n.) A narrow arm of the sea; an estuary; the opening of a river into the sea; as, the Frith of Forth.
Frock (n.) A loose outer garment; especially, a gown forming a part of European modern costume for women and children; also, a coarse shirtlike garment worn by some workmen over their other clothes; a smock frock; as, a marketman's frock. 2. A coarse gown worn by monks or friars, and supposed to take the place of all, or nearly all, other garments. It has a hood which can be drawn over the head at pleasure, and is girded by a cord.
Frond (n.) The organ formed by the combination or union into one body of stem and leaf, and often bearing the fructification; as, the frond of a fern or of a lichen or seaweed; also, the peculiar leaf of a palm tree.
Front (n.) The forehead or brow, the part of the face above the eyes; sometimes, also, the whole face. 2. The forehead, countenance, or personal presence, as expressive of character or temper, and especially, of boldness of disposition, sometimes of impudence; seeming; as, a bold front; a hardened front. 3. The part or surface of anything which seems to look out, or to be directed forward; the fore or forward part; the foremost rank; the van; -- the opposite to back or rear; as, the front of a house; the front of an army. 4. A position directly before the face of a person, or before the foremost part of a thing; as, in front of un person, of the troops, or of a house.
Froth (n.) The bubbles caused in fluids or liquors by fermentation or agitation; spume; foam; esp., a spume of saliva caused by disease or nervous excitement. 2. Any empty, senseless show of wit or eloquence; rhetoric without thought. 3. Light, unsubstantial matter.
Frown (n.) A wrinkling of the face in displeasure, rebuke, etc.; a sour, severe, or stere look; a scowl. 2. Any expression of displeasure; as, the frowns of Providence; the frowns of Fortune.
Frump (n.) A cross, old-fashioned person; esp., an old woman; a gossip.
Fucus (n.) A paint; a dye; also, false show. 2. A genus of tough, leathery seaweeds, usually of a dull brownish green color; rockweed.
Fugue (n.) A polyphonic composition, developed from a given theme or themes, according to strict contrapuntal rules. The theme is first given out by one voice or part, and then, while that pursues its way, it is repeated by another at the interval of a fifth or fourth, and so on, until all the parts have answered one by one, continuing their several melodies and interweaving them in one complex progressive whole, in which the theme is often lost and reappears.
Funis (n.) A cord; specifically, the umbilical cord or navel string.
Funny (n.) A clinkerbuit, narrow boat for sculling.
Furze (n.) A thorny evergreen shrub (Ulex Europaeus), with beautiful yellow flowers, very common upon the plains and hills of Great Britain; -- called also gorse, and whin. The dwarf furze is Ulex nanus.
Fusee (n.) A fuse. See Fuse, n. 2. A small packet of explosive material with wire appendages allowing it to be conveniently attached to a railroad track. It will explode with a loud report when run over by a train, and is used to provide a warning signal to the engineer. 3. The cone or conical wheel of a watch or clock, designed to equalize the power of the mainspring by having the chain from the barrel which contains the spring wind in a spiral groove on the surface of the cone in such a manner that the diameter of the cone at the point where the chain acts may correspond with the degree of tension of the spring.
Fusil (n.) A light kind of flintlock musket, formerly in use. 2. A bearing of a rhomboidal figure; -- named from its shape, which resembles that of a spindle.
Fuzzy (n.) Furnished with fuzz; having fuzz; like fuzz; as, the fuzzy skin of a peach.
Gabel (n.) A rent, service, tribute, custom, tax, impost, or duty; an excise.
Gable (n.) The vertical triangular portion of the end of a building, from the level of the cornice or eaves to the ridge of the roof. Also, a similar end when not triangular in shape, as of a gambrel roof and the like. 2. The end wall of a building, as distinguished from the front or rear side. 3. A decorative member having the shape of a triangular gable, such as that above a Gothic arch in a doorway.
Galea (n.) A genus of fossil echini, having a vaulted, helmet-shaped shell. 2. The anterior, outer process of the second joint of the maxillae in certain insects.
Gally (n.) See Galley, n., 4.
Galop (n.) A kind of lively dance, in 2-4 time; also, the music to the dance.
Gamma (n.) The third letter (/, / = Eng. G) of the Greek alphabet.
Ganch (n.) To drop from a high place upon sharp stakes or hooks, as the Turks dropped malefactors, by way of punishment.
Ganja (n.) The dried hemp plant, used in India for smoking. It is extremely narcotic and intoxicating.
Ganza (n.) A kind of wild goose, by a flock of which a virtuoso was fabled to be carried to the lunar world.
Gaper (n.) A large edible clam (Schizothaerus Nuttalli), of the Pacific coast; -- called also gaper clam. 2. An East Indian bird of the genus Cymbirhynchus, related to the broadbills.
Garth (n.) A close; a yard; a croft; a garden; as, a cloister garth.
Gauge (n.) A measure; a standard of measure; an instrument to determine dimensions, distance, or capacity; a standard. 2. Any instrument for ascertaining or regulating the dimensions or forms of things; a templet or template; as, a button maker's gauge. 3. Any instrument or apparatus for measuring the state of a phenomenon, or for ascertaining its numerical elements at any moment; -- usually applied to some particular instrument; as, a rain gauge; a steam gauge. 4. Relative positions of two or more vessels with reference to the wind; as, a vessel has the weather gauge of another when on the windward side of it, and the lee gauge when on the lee side of it. 5. That part of a shingle, slate, or tile, which is exposed to the weather, when laid; also, one course of such shingles, slates, or tiles.
Gault (n.) A series of beds of clay and marl in the South of England, between the upper and lower greensand of the Cretaceous period.
Gauze (n.) A very thin, slight, transparent stuff, generally of silk; also, any fabric resembling silk gauze; as, wire gauze; cotton gauze.
Gavel (n.) A small heap of grain, not tied up into a bundle. 2. The mallet of the presiding officer in a legislative body, public assembly, court, masonic body, etc.
Gavot (n.) A kind of difficult dance; a dance tune, the air of which has two brisk and lively, yet dignified, strains in common time, each played twice over.
Gazel (n.) The black currant; also, the wild plum.
Gazet (n.) A Venetian coin, worth about three English farthings, or one and a half cents.
Gecko (n.) Any lizard of the family Geckonidae. The geckoes are small, carnivorous, mostly nocturnal animals with large eyes and vertical, elliptical pupils. Their toes are generally expanded, and furnished with adhesive disks, by which they can run over walls and ceilings. They are numerous in warm countries, and a few species are found in Europe and the United States. See Wall gecko, Fanfoot.
Geest (n.) Alluvial matter on the surface of land, not of recent origin.
Gemel (n.) One of the barrulets placed parallel and closed to each other. Cf. Bars gemel, under Gemel, a.
Gemma (n.) A leaf bud, as distinguished from a flower bud. 2. A bud spore; one of the small spores or buds in the reproduction of certain Protozoa, which separate one at a time from the parent cell.
Gemul (n.) A small South American deer (Furcifer Chilensis), with simple forked horns.
Genet (n.) A small-sized, well-proportioned, Spanish horse; a jennet.
Genre (n.) A style of painting, sculpture, or other imitative art, which illustrates everyday life and manners.
Genus (n.) A class of objects divided into several subordinate species; a class more extensive than a species; a precisely defined and exactly divided class; one of the five predicable conceptions, or sorts of terms. 2. An assemblage of species, having so many fundamental points of structure in common, that in the judgment of competent scientists, they may receive a common substantive name. A genus is not necessarily the lowest definable group of species, for it may often be divided into several subgenera. In proportion as its definition is exact, it is natural genus; if its definition can not be made clear, it is more or less an artificial genus.
Geode (n.) A nodule of stone, containing a cavity, lined with crystals or mineral matter.
Ghost (n.) Any faint shadowy semblance; an unsubstantial image; a phantom; a glimmering; as, not a ghost of a chance; the ghost of an idea.
Ghoul (n.) An imaginary evil being among Eastern nations, which was supposed to feed upon human bodies.
Giant (n.) A person of extraordinary strength or powers, bodily or intellectual. 2. Any animal, plant, or thing, of extraordinary size or power.
Guide (n.) The leather strap by which the shield of a knight was slung across the shoulder, or across the neck and shoulder.
Girth (n.) A band or strap which encircles the body; especially, one by which a saddle is fastened upon the back of a horse. 2. The measure round the body, as at the waist or belly; the circumference of anything.
Glade (n.) An opening in the ice of rivers or lakes, or a place left unfrozen; also, smooth ice.
Glama (n.) A copious gummy secretion of the humor of the eyelids, in consequence of some disorder; blearedness; lippitude.
Gland (n.) An organ for secreting something to be used in, or eliminated from, the body; as, the sebaceous glands of the skin; the salivary glands of the mouth. 2. An organ or part which resembles a secreting, or true, gland, as the ductless, lymphatic, pineal, and pituitary glands, the functions of which are very imperfectly known. 3. A special organ of plants, usually minute and globular, which often secretes some kind of resinous, gummy, or aromatic product. 4. The movable part of a stuffing box by which the packing is compressed; -- sometimes called a follower. See Illust. of Stuffing box, under Stuffing.
Glans (n.) The vascular body which forms the apex of the penis, and the extremity of the clitoris.
Glare (n.) A bright, dazzling light; splendor that dazzles the eyes; a confusing and bewildering light. 2. A fierce, piercing look or stare. 3. A viscous, transparent substance. See Glair. 4. A smooth, bright, glassy surface; as, a glare of ice. 5. Smooth and bright or translucent; -- used almost exclusively of ice; as, skating on glare ice.
Glaze (n.) The vitreous coating of pottery or porcelain; anything used as a coating or color in glazing. See Glaze, v. t., 3.
Glebe (n.) The land belonging, or yielding revenue, to a parish church or ecclesiastical benefice.
Gleek (n.) A game at cards, once popular, played by three persons. 2. Three of the same cards held in the same hand; -- hence, three of anything.
Gleet (n.) A transparent mucous discharge from the membrane of the urethra, commonly an effect of gonorrhea.
Glide (n.) The act or manner of moving smoothly, swiftly, and without labor or obstruction. 2. A transitional sound in speech which is produced by the changing of the mouth organs from one definite position to another, and with gradual change in the most frequent cases; as in passing from the begining to the end of a regular diphthong, or from vowel to consonant or consonant to vowel in a syllable, or from one component to the other of a double or diphthongal consonant (see Guide to Pronunciation, // 19, 161, 162). Also (by Bell and others), the vanish (or brief final element) or the brief initial element, in a class of diphthongal vowels, or the brief final or initial part of some consonants (see Guide to Pronunciation, // 18, 97, 191).
Gliff (n.) A moment: as, for a gliff.
Glint (n.) A glimpse, glance, or gleam.
Globe (n.) A round or spherical body, solid or hollow; a body whose surface is in every part equidistant from the center; a ball; a sphere. 2. Anything which is nearly spherical or globular in shape; as, the globe of the eye; the globe of a lamp. 3. A round model of the world; a spherical representation of the earth or heavens; as, a terrestrial or celestial globe; -- called also artificial globe. 4. A body of troops, or of men or animals, drawn up in a circle; -- a military formation used by the Romans, answering to the modern infantry square.
Gloom (n.) Partial or total darkness; thick shade; obscurity; as, the gloom of a forest, or of midnight. 2. A shady, gloomy, or dark place or grove. 3. In gunpowder manufacture, the drying oven.
Glory (n.) Praise, honor, admiration, or distinction, accorded by common consent to a person or thing; high reputation; honorable fame; renown. 2. An emanation of light supposed to proceed from beings of peculiar sanctity. It is represented in art by rays of gold, or the like, proceeding from the head or body, or by a disk, or a mere line.
Gloss (n.) Brightness or luster of a body proceeding from a smooth surface; polish; as, the gloss of silk; cloth is calendered to give it a gloss. 2. A foreign, archaic, technical, or other uncommon word requiring explanation. 3. An interpretation, consisting of one or more words, interlinear or marginal; an explanatory note or comment; a running commentary.
Glove (n.) A cover for the hand, or for the hand and wrist, with a separate sheath for each finger. The latter characteristic distinguishes the glove from the mitten.
Glume (n.) The bracteal covering of the flowers or seeds of grain and grasses; esp., an outer husk or bract of a spikelt.
Glyph (n.) A sunken channel or groove, usually vertical. See Triglyph.
Gnarl (n.) a knot in wood; a large or hard knot, or a protuberance with twisted grain, on a tree.
Gnome (n.) An imaginary being, supposed by the Rosicrucians to inhabit the inner parts of the earth, and to be the guardian of mines, quarries, etc. 2. A dwarf; a goblin; a person of small stature or misshapen features, or of strange appearance.
Godly (n.) Pious; reverencing God, and his character and laws; obedient to the commands of God from love for, and reverence of, his character; conformed to God's law; devout; righteous; as, a godly life.
Going (n.) The act of moving in any manner; traveling; as, the going is bad.
Gomer (n.) A conical chamber at the breech of the bore in heavy ordnance, especially in mortars; -- named after the inventor.
Gonad (n.) One of the masses of generative tissue primitively alike in both sexes, but giving rise to either an ovary or a testis; a generative gland; a germ gland.
Gonys (n.) The keel or lower outline of a bird's bill, so far as the mandibular rami are united.
Goods (n. pl.) See Good, n., 3.
Goody (n.) A bonbon, cake, or the like; -- usually in the pl.
Goose (n.) Any large web-footen bird of the subfamily Anserinae, and belonging to Anser, Branta, Chen, and several allied genera. See Anseres. 2. Any large bird of other related families, resembling the common goose. 3. A tailor's smoothing iron, so called from its handle, which resembles the neck of a goose. 4. A game played with counters on a board divided into compartments, in some of which a goose was depicted.
Goral (n.) An Indian goat antelope (Nemorhedus goral), resembling the chamois.
Gorge (n.) That which is gorged or swallowed, especially by a hawk or other fowl. 2. A filling or choking of a passage or channel by an obstruction; as, an ice gorge in a river. 3. To swallow; especially, to swallow with greediness, or in large mouthfuls or quantities.
Gouge (n.) A chisel, with a hollow or semicylindrical blade, for scooping or cutting holes, channels, or grooves, in wood, stone, etc.; a similar instrument, with curved edge, for turning wood. 2. A bookbinder's tool for blind tooling or gilding, having a face which forms a curve. 3. An incising tool which cuts forms or blanks for gloves, envelopes, etc. from leather, paper, etc. 4. The act of scooping out with a gouge, or as with a gouge; a groove or cavity scooped out, as with a gouge. 5. Imposition; cheat; fraud; also, an impostor; a cheat; a trickish person.
Goura (n.) One of several species of large, crested ground pigeons of the genus Goura, inhabiting New Guinea and adjacent islands. The Queen Victoria pigeon (Goura Victoria) and the crowned pigeon (G. coronata) are among the beat known species.
Gourd (n.) A fleshy, three-celled, many-seeded fruit, as the melon, pumpkin, cucumber, etc., of the order Cucurbitaceae; and especially the bottle gourd (Lagenaria vulgaris) which occurs in a great variety of forms, and, when the interior part is removed, serves for bottles, dippers, cups, and other dishes. 2. A dipper or other vessel made from the shell of a gourd; hence, a drinking vessel; a bottle.
Gowan (n.) The daisy, or mountain daisy.
Graal (n.) See Grail., a dish.
Grace (n.) The exercise of love, kindness, mercy, favor; disposition to benefit or serve another; favor bestowed or privilege conferred. 2. The divine favor toward man; the mercy of God, as distinguished from His justice; also, any benefits His mercy imparts; divine love or pardon; a state of acceptance with God; enjoyment of the divine favor. 3. The prerogative of mercy execised by the executive, as pardon. 4. Beauty, physical, intellectual, or moral; loveliness; commonly, easy elegance of manners; perfection of form. 5. Graceful and beautiful females, sister goddesses, represented by ancient writers as the attendants sometimes of Apollo but oftener of Venus. They were commonly mentioned as three in number; namely, Aglaia, Euphrosyne, and Thalia, and were regarded as the inspirers of the qualities which give attractiveness to wisdom, love, and social intercourse. 6. The title of a duke, a duchess, or an archbishop, and formerly of the king of England. 7. A petition for grace; a blessing asked, or thanks rendered, before or after a meal. 8. Ornamental notes or short passages, either introduced by the performer, or indicated by the composer, in which case the notation signs are called grace notes, appeggiaturas, turns, etc. 9. An act, vote, or decree of the government of the institution; a degree or privilege conferred by such vote or decree. 10. A play designed to promote or display grace of motion. It consists in throwing a small hoop from one player to another, by means of two sticks in the hands of each. Called also grace hoop or hoops.
Grade (n.) A step or degree in any series, rank, quality, order; relative position or standing; as, grades of military rank; crimes of every grade; grades of flour. 2. The rate of ascent or descent; gradient; deviation from a level surface to an inclined plane; -- usually stated as so many feet per mile, or as one foot rise or fall in so many of horizontal distance; as, a heavy grade; a grade of twenty feet per mile, or of 1 in 264. 3. A graded ascending, descending, or level portion of a road; a gradient. 4. The result of crossing a native stock with some better breed. If the crossbreed have more than three fourths of the better blood, it is called high grade.
Graft (n.) A small shoot or scion of a tree inserted in another tree, the stock of which is to support and nourish it. The two unite and become one tree, but the graft determines the kind of fruit. 2. To insert (a graft) in a branch or stem of another tree; to propagate by insertion in another stock; also, to insert a graft upon. 3. To join (one thing) to another as if by grafting, so as to bring about a close union. 4. To cover, as a ring bolt, block strap, splicing, etc., with a weaving of small cord or rope-yarns.
Grail (n.) A broad, open dish; a chalice; -- only used of the Holy Grail.
Grain (n.) A single small hard seed; a kernel, especially of those plants, like wheat, whose seeds are used for food. 2. The fruit of certain grasses which furnish the chief food of man, as corn, wheat, rye, oats, etc., or the plants themselves; -- used collectively. 3. Any small, hard particle, as of sand, sugar, salt, etc.; hence, any minute portion or particle; as, a grain of gunpowder, of pollen, of starch, of sense, of wit, etc. 4. The unit of the English system of weights; -- so called because considered equal to the average of grains taken from the middle of the ears of wheat. 7,000 grains constitute the pound avoirdupois, and 5,760 grains the pound troy. A grain is equal to .0648 gram. See Gram. 5. A reddish dye made from the coccus insect, or kermes; hence, a red color of any tint or hue, as crimson, scarlet, etc.; sometimes used by the poets as equivalent to Tyrian purple. 6. The composite particles of any substance; that arrangement of the particles of any body which determines its comparative roughness or hardness; texture; as, marble, sugar, sandstone, etc., of fine grain. 7. The direction, arrangement, or appearance of the fibers in wood, or of the strata in stone, slate, etc. 8. The hair side of a piece of leather, or the marking on that side. 9. The remains of grain, etc., after brewing or distillation; hence, any residuum. Also called draff. 10. A rounded prominence on the back of a sepal, as in the common dock. See Grained, a., 4. 11. To form grains, or to assume a granular ferm, as the result of crystallization; to granulate. 12. A tine, prong, or fork. 13. An iron first speak or harpoon, having four or more barbed points. 14. A blade of a sword, knife, etc. 15. A thin piece of metal, used in a mold to steady a core.
Grape (n.) A well-known edible berry growing in pendent clusters or bunches on the grapevine. The berries are smooth-skinned, have a juicy pulp, and are cultivated in great quantities for table use and for making wine and raisins.
Grasp (n.) A gripe or seizure of the hand; a seizure by embrace, or infolding in the arms. 2. Reach of the arms; hence, the power of seizing and holding; as, it was beyond his grasp.
Grass (n.) An endogenous plant having simple leaves, a stem generally jointed and tubular, the husks or glumes in pairs, and the seed single.
Grate (n.) A structure or frame containing parallel or crosed bars, with interstices; a kind of latticework, such as is used ia the windows of prisons and cloisters. 2. A frame or bed, or kind of basket, of iron bars, for holding fuel while burning.
Grave (n.) To carve or cut, as letters or figures, on some hard substance; to engrave. 2. To carve out or give shape to, by cutting with a chisel; to sculpture; as, to grave an image. 3. An excavation in the earth as a place of burial; also, any place of interment; a tomb; a sepulcher. Hence: Death; destruction.
Gravy (n.) The juice or other liquid matter that drips from flesh in cooking, made into a dressing for the food when served up. 2. Liquid dressing for meat, fish, vegetables, etc.
Great (n.) The whole; the gross; as, a contract to build a ship by the great.
Grebe (n.) One of several swimming birds or divers, of the genus Colymbus (formerly Podiceps), and allied genera, found in the northern parts of America, Europe, and Asia. They have strong, sharp bills, and lobate toes.
Greed (n.) An eager desire or longing; greediness; as, a greed of gain.
Greek (n.) A native, or one of the people, of Greece; a Grecian; also, the language of Greece. 2. Something unintelligible; as, it was all Greek to me.
Green (n.) A grassy plain or plat; a piece of ground covered with verdant herbage; as, the village green. 2. pl. Leaves and stems of young plants, as spinach, beets, etc., which in their green state are boiled for food.
Grego (n.) A short jacket or cloak, made of very thick, coarse cloth, with a hood attached, worn by the Greeks and others in the Levant.
Grice (n.) See Gree, a step.
Grill (n.) To torment, as if by broiling.
Grime (n.) Foul matter; dirt, rubbed in; sullying blackness, deeply ingrained.
Grind (n.) The act of reducing to powder, or of sharpening, by friction. 2. Any severe continuous work or occupation; esp., hard and uninteresting study.
Gripe (n.) That on which the grasp is put; a handle; a grip; as, the gripe of a sword. 2. Oppression; cruel exaction; affiction; pinching distress; as, the gripe of poverty. 3. The compass or sharpness of a ship's stern under the water, having a tendency to make her keep a good wind. 4. An assemblage of ropes, dead-eyes, and hocks, fastened to ringbolts in the deck, to secure the boats when hoisted; also, broad bands passed around a boat to secure it at the davits and prevent swinging.
Grise (n.) See Grice, a pig.
Grist (n.) Ground corn; that which is ground at one time; as much grain as is carried to the mill at one time, or the meal it produces. 2. In rope making, a given size of rope, common grist being a rope three inches in circumference, with twenty yarns in each of the three strands.
Groan (n.) A low, moaning sound; usually, a deep, mournful sound uttered in pain or great distress; sometimes, an expression of strong disapprobation; as, the remark was received with groans.
Groat (n.) An old English silver coin, equal to four pence.
Groin (n.) The line between the lower part of the abdomen and the thigh, or the region of this line; the inguen. 2. The projecting solid angle formed by the meeting of two vaults, growing more obtuse as it approaches the summit.
Groom (n.) A boy or young man; a waiter; a servant; especially, a man or boy who has charge of horses, or the stable. 2. One of several officers of the English royal household, chiefly in the lord chamberlain's department; as, the groom of the chamber; the groom of the stole. 3. A man recently married, or about to be married; a bridegroom.
Group (n.) A cluster, crowd, or throng; an assemblage, either of persons or things, collected without any regular form or arrangement; as, a group of men or of trees; a group of isles. 2. An assemblage of objects in a certain order or relation, or having some resemblance or common characteristic; as, groups of strata. 3. A variously limited assemblage of animals or plants, having some resemblance, or common characteristics in form or structure. The term has different uses, and may be made to include certain species of a genus, or a whole genus, or certain genera, or even several orders. 4. A number of eighth, sixteenth, etc., notes joined at the stems; -- sometimes rather indefinitely applied to any ornament made up of a few short notes. 5. To form a group of; to arrange or combine in a group or in groups, often with reference to mutual relation and the best effect; to form an assemblage of.
Grout (n.) Formerly, a kind of beer or ale. 2. A thin, coarse mortar, used for pouring into the joints of masonry and brickwork; also, a finer material, used in finishing the best ceilings. Gwilt.
Growl (n.) The deep, threatening sound made by a surly dog; a grumbling sound.
Gruel (n.) A light, liquid food, made by boiling meal of maize, oatmeal, or fiour in water or milk; thin porridge.
Grume (n.) A thick, viscid fluid; a clot, as of blood.
Grunt (n.) A deep, guttural sound, as of a hog. 2. Any one of several species of American food fishes, of the genus Haemulon, allied to the snappers, as, the black grunt (A. Plumieri), and the redmouth grunt (H. aurolineatus), of the Southern United States; -- also applied to allied species of the genera Pomadasys, Orthopristis, and Pristopoma. Called also pigfish, squirrel fish, and grunter; -- so called from the noise it makes when taken.
Guaco (n.) A plant (Aristolochia anguicida) of Carthagena, used as an antidote to serpent bites. 2. The Mikania Guaco, of Brazil, used for the same purpose.
Guano (n.) A substance found in great abundance on some coasts or islands frequented by sea fowls, and composed chiefly of their excrement. It is rich in phosphates and ammonia, and is used as a powerful fertilizer.
Guard (n.) To protect from danger; to secure against surprise, attack, or injury; to keep in safety; to defend; to shelter; to shield from surprise or attack; to protect by attendance; to accompany for protection; to care for. 2. To keep watch over, in order to prevent escape or restrain from acts of violence, or the like. 3. To protect the edge of, esp. with an ornamental border; hence, to face or ornament with lists, laces, etc.
Guava (n.) A tropical tree, or its fruit, of the genus Psidium. Two varieties are well known, the P. pyriferum, or white guava, and P. pomiferum, or red guava. The fruit or berry is shaped like a pomegranate, but is much smaller. It is somewhat astringent, but makes a delicious jelly.
Guelf (n.) One of a faction in Germany and Italy, in the 12th and 13th centuries, which supported the House of Guelph and the pope, and opposed the Ghibellines, or faction of the German emperors.
Guess (n.) An opinion as to anything, formed without sufficient or decisive evidence or grounds; an attempt to hit upon the truth by a random judgment; a conjecture; a surmise.
Guise (n.) Customary way of speaking or acting; custom; fashion; manner; behavior; mien; mode; practice; -- often used formerly in such phrases as: at his own guise; that is, in his own fashion, to suit himself. 2. Cover; cloak; as, under the guise of patriotism.
Gulch (n.) A ravine, or part of the deep bed of a torrent when dry; a gully.
Gules (n.) The tincture red, indicated in seals and engraved figures of escutcheons by parallel vertical lines. Hence, used poetically for a red color or that which is red.
Gumma (n.) A kind of soft tumor, usually of syphilitic origin.
Gurry (n.) An alvine evacuation; also, refuse matter.
Gutta (n.) One of a series of ornaments, in the form of a frustum of a cone, attached to the lower part of the triglyphs, and also to the lower faces of the mutules, in the Doric order; -- called also campana, and drop.
Gypsy (n.) One of a vagabond race, whose tribes, coming originally from India, entered Europe in 14th or 15th centry, and are now scattered over Turkey, Russia, Hungary, Spain, England, etc., living by theft, fortune telling, horsejockeying, tinkering, etc. Cf. Bohemian, Romany.
Gyron (n.) A subordinary of triangular form having one of its angles at the fess point and the opposite aide at the edge of the escutcheon. When there is only one gyron on the shield it is bounded by two lines drawn from the fess point, one horizontally to the dexter side, and one to the dexter chief corner.
Gyrus (n.) A convoluted ridge between grooves; a convolution; as, the gyri of the brain; the gyri of brain coral. See Brain.
Habit (n.) The usual condition or state of a person or thing, either natural or acquired, regarded as something had, possessed, and firmly retained; as, a religious habit; his habit is morose; elms have a spreading habit; esp., physical temperament or constitution; as, a full habit of body. 2. Fixed or established custom; ordinary course of conduct; practice; usage; hence, prominently, the involuntary tendency or aptitude to perform certain actions which is acquired by their frequent repetition; as, habit is second nature; also, peculiar ways of acting; characteristic forms of behavior. 3. Outward appearance; attire; dress; hence, a garment; esp., a closely fitting garment or dress worn by ladies; as, a riding habit.
Hades (n.) The nether world (according to classical mythology, the abode of the shades, ruled over by Hades or Pluto); the invisible world; the grave.
Hakim (n.) A wise man; a physician, esp. a Mohammedan.
Halma (n.) The long jump, with weights in the hands, -- the most important of the exercises of the Pentathlon.
Hanap (n.) A rich goblet, esp. one used on state occasions.
Hardy (n.) A blacksmith's fuller or chisel, having a square shank for insertion into a square hole in an anvil, called the hardy hole.
Harem (n.) The family of wives and concubines belonging to one man, in Mohammedan countries; a seraglio.
Harpa (n.) A genus of marine univalve shells; the harp shells; -- so called from the form of the shells, and their ornamental ribs.
Harpy (n.) A fabulous winged monster, ravenous and filthy, having the face of a woman and the body of a vulture, with long claws, and the face pale with hunger. Some writers mention two, others three. 2. A large and powerful, double-crested, short-winged American eagle (Thrasaetus harpyia). It ranges from Texas to Brazil.
Haste (n.) Celerity of motion; speed; swiftness; dispatch; expedition; -- applied only to voluntary beings, as men and other animals.
Hasty (n.) Involving haste; done, made, etc., in haste; as, a hasty sketch. 2. Moving or acting with haste or in a hurry; hurrying; hence, acting without deliberation; precipitate; rash; easily excited; eager. 3. Made or reached without deliberation or due caution; as, a hasty conjecture, inference, conclusion, etc., a hasty resolution. 4. Proceeding from, or indicating, a quick temper.
Hatch (n.) A door with an opening over it; a half door, sometimes set with spikes on the upper edge. 2. A frame or weir in a river, for catching fish. 3. An opening in the deck of a vessel or floor of a warehouse which serves as a passageway or hoistway; a hatchway; also; a cover or door, or one of the covers used in closing such an opening. 4. An opening into, or in search of, a mine.
Haulm (n.) The denuded stems or stalks of such crops as buckwheat and the cereal grains, beans, etc.; straw.
Haunt (n.) A place to which one frequently resorts; as, drinking saloons are the haunts of tipplers; a den is the haunt of wild beasts.
Haven (n.) A bay, recess, or inlet of the sea, or the mouth of a river, which affords anchorage and shelter for shipping; a harbor; a port.
Hawse (n.) The situation of the cables when a vessel is moored with two anchors, one on the starboard, the other on the port bow. 2. The distance ahead to which the cables usually extend; as, the ship has a clear or open hawse, or a foul hawse; to anchor in our hawse, or athwart hawse.
Hazel (n.) A shrub or small tree of the genus Corylus, as the C. avellana, bearing a nut containing a kernel of a mild, farinaceous taste; the filbert. The American species are C. Americana, which produces the common hazelnut, and C. rostrata. See Filbert.
Heart (n.) A hollow, muscular organ, which, by contracting rhythmically, keeps up the circulation of the blood. 2. The seat of the affections or sensibilities, collectively or separately, as love, hate, joy, grief, courage, and the like; rarely, the seat of the understanding or will; -- usually in a good sense, when no epithet is expressed; the better or lovelier part of our nature; the spring of all our actions and purposes; the seat of moral life and character; the moral affections and character itself; the individual disposition and character; as, a good, tender, loving, bad, hard, or selfish heart. 3. The nearest the middle or center; the part most hidden and within; the inmost or most essential part of any body or system; the source of life and motion in any organization; the chief or vital portion; the center of activity, or of energetic or efficient action; as, the heart of a country, of a tree, etc. 4. Vigorous and efficient activity; power of fertile production; condition of the soil, whether good or bad. 5. That which resembles a heart in shape; especially, a roundish or oval figure or object having an obtuse point at one end, and at the other a corresponding indentation, -- used as a symbol or representative of the heart. 6. One of a series of playing cards, distinguished by the figure or figures of a heart; as, hearts are trumps.
Heath (n.) A low shrub (Erica, / Calluna, vulgaris), with minute evergreen leaves, and handsome clusters of pink flowers. It is used in Great Britain for brooms, thatch, beds for the poor, and for heating ovens. It is also called heather, and ling. 2. Also, any species of the genus Erica, of which several are European, and many more are South African, some of great beauty. See Illust. of Heather.
Heave (n.) An effort to raise something, as a weight, or one's self, or to move something heavy. 2. An upward motion; a rising; a swell or distention, as of the breast in difficult breathing, of the waves, of the earth in an earthquake, and the like. 3. A horizontal dislocation in a metallic lode, taking place at an intersection with another lode.
Hedge (n.) A thicket of bushes, usually thorn bushes; especially, such a thicket planted as a fence between any two portions of land; and also any sort of shrubbery, as evergreens, planted in a line or as a fence; particularly, such a thicket planted round a field to fence it, or in rows to separate the parts of a garden.
Helix (n.) A nonplane curve whose tangents are all equally inclined to a given plane. The common helix is the curve formed by the thread of the ordinary screw. It is distinguished from the spiral, all the convolutions of which are in the plane. 2. A genus of land snails, including a large number of species.
Helot (n.) A slave in ancient Sparta; a Spartan serf; hence, a slave or serf.
Helve (n.) The handle of an ax, hatchet, or adze. 2. The lever at the end of which is the hammer head, in a forge hammer.
Hemin (n.) A substance, in the form of reddish brown, microscopic, prismatic crystals, formed from dried blood by the action of strong acetic acid and common salt; -- called also Teichmann's crystals. Chemically, it is a hydrochloride of hematin.
Henna (n.) A thorny tree or shrub of the genus Lawsonia (L. alba). The fragrant white blossoms are used by the Buddhists in religious ceremonies. The powdered leaves furnish a red coloring matter used in the East to stain the hails and fingers, the manes of horses, etc. 2. The leaves of the henna plant, or a preparation or dyestuff made from them.
Henry (n.) The unit of electric induction; the induction in a circuit when the electro-motive force induced in this circuit is one volt, while the inducing current varies at the rate of one ampere a second.
Hepar (n.) Liver of sulphur; a substance of a liver-brown color, sometimes used in medicine. It is formed by fusing sulphur with carbonates of the alkalies (esp. potassium), and consists essentially of alkaline sulphides. Called also hepar sulphuris (/). 2. Any substance resembling hepar proper, in appearance; specifically, in homeopathy, calcium sulphide, called also hepar sulphuris calcareum (/).
Herma (n.) See Hermes, 2.
Heron (n.) Any wading bird of the genus Ardea and allied genera, of the family Ardeidae. The herons have a long, sharp bill, and long legs and toes, with the claw of the middle toe toothed. The common European heron (Ardea cinerea) is remarkable for its directly ascending flight, and was formerly hunted with the larger falcons.
Herse (n.) A kind of gate or portcullis, having iron bars, like a harrow, studded with iron spikes. It is hung above gateways so that it may be quickly lowered, to impede the advance of an enemy. 2. See Hearse, a carriage for the dead.
Hexad (n.) An atom whose valence is six, and which can be theoretically combined with, substituted for, or replaced by, six monad atoms or radicals; as, sulphur is a hexad in sulphuric acid. Also used as an adjective.
Hexyl (n.) A compound radical, C6H13, regarded as the essential residue of hexane, and a related series of compounds.
Hilum (n.) The part of a gland, or similar organ, where the blood vessels and nerves enter; the hilus; as, the hilum of the kidney.
Hilus (n.) Same as Hilum, 2.
Hindi (n.) The name given by Europeans to that form of the Hindustani language which is chiefly spoken by native Hindoos. In employs the Devanagari character, in which Sanskrit is written.
Hinge (n.) The hook with its eye, or the joint, on which a door, gate, lid, etc., turns or swings; a flexible piece, as a strip of leather, which serves as a joint to turn on. 2. That on which anything turns or depends; a governing principle; a cardinal point or rule; as, this argument was the hinge on which the question turned. 3. One of the four cardinal points, east, west, north, or south.
Hipps (n.) See Hyp, n.
Hippe (n.) A genus of marine decapod crustaceans, which burrow rapidly in the sand by pushing themselves backward; -- called also bait bug. See Illust. under Anomura.
Hitch (n.) A catch; anything that holds, as a hook; an impediment; an obstacle; an entanglement. 2. The act of catching, as on a hook, etc. 3. A stop or sudden halt; a stoppage; an impediment; a temporary obstruction; an obstacle; as, a hitch in one's progress or utterance; a hitch in the performance. 4. A sudden movement or pull; a pull up; as, the sailor gave his trousers a hitch. 5. A knot or noose in a rope which can be readily undone; -- intended for a temporary fastening; as, a half hitch; a clove hitch; a timber hitch, etc.
Hithe (n.) A port or small haven; -- used in composition; as, Lambhithe, now Lambeth.
Hives (n.) An eruptive disease (Varicella globularis), allied to the chicken pox.
Hoard (n.) See Hoarding, 2. 2. A store, stock, or quantity of anything accumulated or laid up; a hidden supply; a treasure; as, a hoard of provisions; a hoard of money.
Hobby (n.) A small, strong-winged European falcon (Falco subbuteo), formerly trained for hawking.
Hobit (n.) A small mortar on a gun carriage, in use before the howitzer.
Hough (n.) The joint in the hind limb of quadrupeds between the leg and shank, or tibia and tarsus, and corresponding to the ankle in man. 2. A piece cut by butchers, esp. in pork, from either the front or hind leg, just above the foot.
Hoddy (n.) See Dun crow, under Dun, a.
Hoist (n.) The perpendicular height of a flag, as opposed to the fly, or horizontal length when flying from a staff.
Holly (n.) A tree or shrub of the genus Ilex. The European species (Ilex Aguifolium) is best known, having glossy green leaves, with a spiny, waved edge, and bearing berries that turn red or yellow about Michaelmas.
Homer (n.) A Hebrew measure containing, as a liquid measure, ten baths, equivalent to fifty-five gallons, two quarts, one pint; and, as a dry measure, ten ephahs, equivalent to six bushels, two pecks, four quarts.
Honey (n.) A sweet viscid fluid, esp. that collected by bees from flowers of plants, and deposited in the cells of the honeycomb. 2. That which is sweet or pleasant, like honey.
Honor (n.) That which rightfully attracts esteem, respect, or consideration; self-respect; dignity; courage; fidelity; especially, excellence of character; high moral worth; virtue; nobleness; specif., in men, integrity; uprightness; trustworthness; in women, purity; chastity. 2. A nice sense of what is right, just, and true, with course of life correspondent thereto; strict conformity to the duty imposed by conscience, position, or privilege. 3. A token of esteem paid to worth; a mark of respect; a ceremonial sign of consideration; as, he wore an honor on his breast; military honors; civil honors. 4. A cause of respect and fame; a glory; an excellency; an ornament; as, he is an honor to his nation. 5. A title applied to the holders of certain honorable civil offices, or to persons of rank; as, His Honor the Mayor. See Note under Honorable. 6. A seigniory or lordship held of the king, on which other lordships and manors depended. 7. Academic or university prizes or distinctions; as, honors in classics. 8. The ace, king, queen, and jack of trumps. The ten and nine are sometimes called Dutch honors. 9. To regard or treat with honor, esteem, or respect; to revere; to treat with deference and submission; when used of the Supreme Being, to reverence; to adore; to worship. 10. To dignify; to raise to distinction or notice; to bestow honor upon; to elevate in rank or station; to ennoble; to exalt; to glorify; hence, to do something to honor; to treat in a complimentary manner or with civility. 11. To accept and pay when due; as, to honora bill of exchange.
Hoody (n.) The hooded crow; also, in Scotland, the hooded gull.
Hoove (n.) A disease in cattle consisting in inflammation of the stomach by gas, ordinarily caused by eating too much green food; tympany; bloating.
Hoppo (n.) A collector of customs, as at Canton; an overseer of commerce.
Horde (n.) A wandering troop or gang; especially, a clan or tribe of a nomadic people migrating from place to place for the sake of pasturage, plunder, etc.; a predatory multitude.
Horse (n.) A hoofed quadruped of the genus Equus; especially, the domestic horse (E. caballus), which was domesticated in Egypt and Asia at a very early period. It has six broad molars, on each side of each jaw, with six incisors, and two canine teeth, both above and below. The mares usually have the canine teeth rudimentary or wanting. The horse differs from the true asses, in having a long, flowing mane, and the tail bushy to the base. Unlike the asses it has callosities, or chestnuts, on all its legs. The horse excels in strength, speed, docility, courage, and nobleness of character, and is used for drawing, carrying, bearing a rider, and like purposes. 2. The male of the genus horse, in distinction from the female or male; usually, a castrated male. 3. Mounted soldiery; cavalry; -- used without the plural termination; as, a regiment of horse; -- distinguished from foot. 4. A frame with legs, used to support something; as, a clotheshorse, a sawhorse, etc. 5. A frame of timber, shaped like a horse, on which soldiers were made to ride for punishment. 6. Anything, actual or figurative, on which one rides as on a horse; a hobby. 7. A mass of earthy matter, or rock of the same character as the wall rock, occurring in the course of a vein, as of coal or ore; hence, to take horse -- said of a vein -- is to divide into branches for a distance. 8. See Footrope, a.
Hotel (n.) A house for entertaining strangers or travelers; an inn or public house, of the better class. 2. In France, the mansion or town residence of a person of rank or wealth.
Hough (n.) Same as Hock, a joint.
Hound (n.) A variety of the domestic dog, usually having large, drooping ears, esp. one which hunts game by scent, as the foxhound, bloodhound, deerhound, but also used for various breeds of fleet hunting dogs, as the greyhound, boarhound, etc. 2. Projections at the masthead, serving as a support for the trestletrees and top to rest on.
Hours (n. pl.) Goddess of the seasons, or of the hours of the day.
House (n.) A structure intended or used as a habitation or shelter for animals of any kind; but especially, a building or edifice for the habitation of man; a dwelling place, a mansion. 2. A family of ancestors, descendants, and kindred; a race of persons from the same stock; a tribe; especially, a noble family or an illustrious race; as, the house of Austria; the house of Hanover; the house of Israel. 3. One of the estates of a kingdom or other government assembled in parliament or legislature; a body of men united in a legislative capacity; as, the House of Lords; the House of Commons; the House of Representatives; also, a quorum of such a body. See Congress, and Parliament. 4. A firm, or commercial establishment. 5. A twelfth part of the heavens, as divided by six circles intersecting at the north and south points of the horizon, used by astrologers in noting the positions of the heavenly bodies, and casting horoscopes or nativities. The houses were regarded as fixed in respect to the horizon, and numbered from the one at the eastern horizon, called the ascendant, first house, or house of life, downward, or in the direction of the earth's revolution, the stars and planets passing through them in the reverse order every twenty-four hours. 6. A square on a chessboard, regarded as the proper place of a piece. 7. An audience; an assembly of hearers, as at a lecture, a theater, etc.; as, a thin or a full house. 8. The body, as the habitation of the soul.
Hovel (n.) An open shed for sheltering cattle, or protecting produce, etc., from the weather. 2. A poor cottage; a small, mean house; a hut.
Howel (n.) A tool used by coopers for smoothing and chamfering rheir work, especially the inside of casks.
Humin (n.) A bitter, brownish yellow, amorphous substance, extracted from vegetable mold, and also produced by the action of acids on certain sugars and carbohydrates; -- called also humic acid, ulmin, gein, ulmic or geic acid, etc.
Humor (n.) Moisture, especially, the moisture or fluid of animal bodies, as the chyle, lymph, etc.; as, the humors of the eye, etc. 2. A vitiated or morbid animal fluid, such as often causes an eruption on the skin. 3. State of mind, whether habitual or temporary (as formerly supposed to depend on the character or combination of the fluids of the body); disposition; temper; mood; as, good humor; ill humor. 4. That quality of the imagination which gives to ideas an incongruous or fantastic turn, and tends to excite laughter or mirth by ludicrous images or representations; a playful fancy; facetiousness.
Hunch (n.) A lump; a thick piece; as, a hunch of bread. 2. A push or thrust, as with the elbow.
Hunks (n.) A covetous, sordid man; a miser; a niggard.
Hurst (n.) A wood or grove; -- a word used in the composition of many names, as in Hazlehurst.
Hussy (n.) A case or bag. See Housewife, 2.
Hutch (n.) A chest, box, coffer, bin, coop, or the like, in which things may be stored, or animals kept; as, a grain hutch; a rabbit hutch. 2. A car on low wheels, in which coal is drawn in the mine and hoisted out of the pit.
Hyads (n.pl.) A cluster of five stars in the face of the constellation Taurus, supposed by the ancients to indicate the coming of rainy weather when they rose with the sun.
Hydra (n.) A serpent or monster in the lake or marsh of Lerna, in the Peloponnesus, represented as having many heads, one of which, when cut off, was immediately succeeded by two others, unless the wound was cauterized. It was slain by Hercules. Hence, a terrible monster. 2. Hence: A multifarious evil, or an evil having many sources; not to be overcome by a single effort. 3. Any small fresh-water hydroid of the genus Hydra, usually found attached to sticks, stones, etc., by a basal sucker. 4. A southern constellation of great length lying southerly from Cancer, Leo, and Virgo.
Hyena (n.) Any carnivorous mammal of the family Hyaenidae, of which three living species are known. They are large and strong, but cowardly. They feed chiefly on carrion, and are nocturnal in their habits.
Hymen (n.) A fabulous deity; according to some, the son of Apollo and Urania, according to others, of Bacchus and Venus. He was the god of marriage, and presided over nuptial solemnities.
Hyrax (n.) Any animal of the genus Hyrax, of which about four species are known. They constitute the order Hyracoidea. The best known species are the daman (H. Syriacus) of Palestine, and the klipdas (H. capensis) of South Africa. Other species are H. arboreus and H. Sylvestris, the former from Southern, and the latter from Western, Africa. See Daman.
Ichor (n.) A thin, acrid, watery discharge from an ulcer, wound, etc.
Icing (n.) A coating or covering resembling ice, as of sugar and milk or white of egg; frosting.
Ictus (n.) A stroke or blow, as in a sunstroke, the sting of an insect, pulsation of an artery, etc.
Ideal (n.) A mental conception regarded as a standard of perfection; a model of excellence, beauty, etc.
Idiom (n.) An expression conforming or appropriate to the peculiar structural form of a language; in extend use, an expression sanctioned by usage, having a sense peculiar to itself and not agreeing with the logical sense of its structural form; also, the phrase forms peculiar to a particular author.
Idiot (n.) A man in private station, as distinguished from one holding a public office. 2. An unlearned, ignorant, or simple person, as distinguished from the educated; an ignoramus. 3. A human being destitute of the ordinary intellectual powers, whether congenital, developmental, or accidental; commonly, a person without understanding from birth; a natural fool; a natural; an innocent.
Idler (n.) One who has constant day duties on board ship, and keeps no regular watch.
Igloo (n.) A cavity, or excavation, made in the snow by a seal, over its breathing hole in the ice.
Ileum (n.) The last, and usually the longest, division of the small intestine; the part between the jejunum and large intestine.
Ileus (n.) A morbid condition due to intestinal obstruction. It is characterized by complete constipation, with griping pains in the abdomen, which is greatly distended, and in the later stages by vomiting of fecal matter. Called also ileac, / iliac, passion.
Ilium (n.) The dorsal one of the three principal bones comprising either lateral half of the pelvis; the dorsal or upper part of the hip bone. See Innominate bone, under Innominate.
Image (n.) An imitation, representation, or similitude of any person, thing, or act, sculptured, drawn, painted, or otherwise made perceptible to the sight; a visible presentation; a copy; a likeness; an effigy; a picture; a semblance. 2. A picture, example, or illustration, often taken from sensible objects, and used to illustrate a subject; usually, an extended metaphor. 3. The figure or picture of any object formed at the focus of a lens or mirror, by rays of light from the several points of the object symmetrically refracted or reflected to corresponding points in such focus; this may be received on a screen, a photographic plate, or the retina of the eye, and viewed directly by the eye, or with an eyeglass, as in the telescope and microscope; the likeness of an object formed by reflection; as, to see one's image in a mirror.
Imago (n.) The final adult, and usually winged, state of an insect. See Illust. of Ant-lion, and Army worm.
Imaum (n.) Among the Mohammedans, a minister or priest who performs the regular service of the mosque. 2. A Mohammedan prince who, as a successor of Mohammed, unites in his person supreme spiritual and temporal power.
Imide (n.) A compound with, or derivative of, the imido group; specif., a compound of one or more acid radicals with the imido group, or with a monamine; hence, also, a derivative of ammonia, in which two atoms of hydrogen have been replaced by divalent basic or acid radicals; -- frequently used as a combining form; as, succinimide.
Index (n.) That which points out; that which shows, indicates, manifests, or discloses. 2. That which guides, points out, informs, or directs; a pointer or a hand that directs to anything, as the hand of a watch, a movable finger on a gauge, scale, or other graduated instrument. In printing, a sign used to direct particular attention to a note or paragraph; -- called also fist. 3. A table for facilitating reference to topics, names, and the like, in a book; -- usually alphabetical in arrangement, and printed at the end of the volume. 4. The second digit, that next pollex, in the manus, or hand; the forefinger; index finger.
India (n.) A country in Southern Asia; the two peninsulas of Hither and Farther India; in a restricted sense, Hither India, or Hindostan.
Indin (n.) A dark red crystalline substance, isomeric with and resembling indigo blue, and obtained from isatide and dioxindol.
Indol (n.) A white, crystalline substance, C8H7N, obtained from blue indigo, and almost all indigo derivatives, by a process of reduction. It is also formed from albuminous matter, together with skatol, by putrefaction, and by fusion with caustic potash, and is present in human excrement, as well as in the intestinal canal of some herbivora.
Ingot (n.) A bar or wedge of steel, gold, or other malleable metal, cast in a mold; a mass of unwrought cast metal.
Inker (n.) One who, or that which, inks; especially, in printing, the pad or roller which inks the type.
Inlay (n.) Matter or pieces of wood, ivory, etc., inlaid, or prepared for inlaying; that which is inserted or inlaid for ornament or variety.
Inlet (n.) A bay or recess,as in the shore of a sea, lake, or large river; a narrow strip of water running into the land or between islands.
Inset (n.) One or more separate leaves inserted in a volume before binding; as: (a) A portion of the printed sheet in certain sizes of books which is cut off before folding, and set into the middle of the folded sheet to complete the succession of paging; -- also called offcut. (b) A page or pages of advertisements inserted.
Iodal (n.) An oily liquid, Cl3.CHO, analogous to chloral and bromal.
Ionic (n.) A foot consisting of four syllables: either two long and two short, -- that is, a spondee and a pyrrhic, in which case it is called the greater Ionic; or two short and two long, -- that is, a pyrrhic and a spondee, in which case it is called the smaller Ionic. 2. The Ionic dialect; as, the Homeric Ionic.
Irish (n. sing. & pl.) The natives or inhabitants of Ireland, esp. the Celtic natives or their descendants.
Irony (n.) A sort of humor, ridicule, or light sarcasm, which adopts a mode of speech the meaning of which is contrary to the literal sense of the words.
Islam (n.) The religion of the Mohammedans; Mohammedanism; Islamism. Their formula of faith is: There is no God but Allah, and Mohammed is his prophet. 2. The whole body of Mohammedans, or the countries which they occupy.
Issue (n.) The act of passing or flowing out; a moving out from any inclosed place; egress; as, the issue of water from a pipe, of blood from a wound, of air from a bellows, of people from a house. 2. The act of sending out, or causing to go forth; delivery; issuance; as, the issue of an order from a commanding officer; the issue of money from a treasury. 3. That which passes, flows, or is sent out; the whole quantity sent forth or emitted at one time; as, an issue of bank notes; the daily issue of a newspaper. 4. Progeny; a child or children; offspring. In law, sometimes, in a general sense, all persons descended from a common ancestor; all lineal descendants. 5. Produce of the earth, or profits of land, tenements, or other property; as, A conveyed to B all his right for a term of years, with all the issues, rents, and profits. 6. A discharge of flux, as of blood. 7. An artificial ulcer, usually made in the fleshy part of the arm or leg, to produce the secretion and discharge of pus for the relief of some affected part. 8. The final outcome or result; upshot; conclusion; event; hence, contest; test; trial. 9. In pleading, a single material point of law or fact depending in the suit, which, being affirmed on the one side and denied on the other, is presented for determination. See General issue, under General, and Feigned issue, under Feigned.
Itala (n.) An early Latin version of the Scriptures (the Old Testament was translated from the Septuagint, and was also called the Italic version).
Iulus (n.) A genus of chilognathous myriapods. The body is long and round, consisting of numerous smooth, equal segments, each of which bears two pairs of short legs. It includes the galleyworms. See Chilognatha.
Ivory (n.) The hard, white, opaque, fine-grained substance constituting the tusks of the elephant. It is a variety of dentine, characterized by the minuteness and close arrangement of the tubes, as also by their double flexure. It is used in manufacturing articles of ornament or utility. 2. The tusks themselves of the elephant, etc. 3. Teeth; as, to show one's ivories.
Ixtli (n.) A Mexican name for a variety of Agave rigida, which furnishes a strong coarse fiber; also, the fiber itself, which is called also pita, and Tampico fiber.
Jabot (n.) Originally, a kind of ruffle worn by men on the bosom of the shirt. 2. An arrangement of lace or tulle, looped ornamentally, and worn by women on the front of the dress.
Jacob (n.) A Hebrew patriarch (son of Isaac, and ancestor of the Jews), who in a vision saw a ladder reaching up to heaven (Gen. xxviii. 12); -- also called Israel.
Jager (n.) Any species of gull of the genus Stercorarius. Three species occur on the Atlantic coast. The jagers pursue other species of gulls and force them to disgorge their prey. The two middle tail feathers are usually decidedly longer than the rest. Called also boatswain, and marline-spike bird. The name is also applied to the skua, or Arctic gull (Megalestris skua).
Jaina (n.) One of a numerous sect in British India, holding the tenets of Jainism.
Jakie (n.) A South American striped frog (Pseudis paradoxa), remarkable for having a tadpole larger than the adult, and hence called also paradoxical frog.
Jalap (n.) The tubers of the Mexican plant Ipomoea purga (or Exogonium purga), a climber much like the morning-glory. The abstract, extract, and powder, prepared from the tubers, are well known purgative medicines. Other species of Ipomoea yield several inferior kinds of jalap, as the I. Orizabensis, and I. tuberosa.
Jantu (n.) A machine of great antiquity, used in Bengal for raising water to irrigate land.
Janus (n.) A Latin deity represented with two faces looking in opposite directions. Numa is said to have dedicated to Janus the covered passage at Rome, near the Forum, which is usually called the Temple of Janus. This passage was open in war and closed in peace.
Japan (n.) Work varnished and figured in the Japanese manner; also, the varnish or lacquer used in japanning.
Jards (n.) A callous tumor on the leg of a horse, below the hock.
Jasey (n.) A wig; -- so called, perhaps, from being made of, or resembling, Jersey yarn.
Jelly (n.) Anything brought to a gelatinous condition; a viscous, translucent substance in a condition between liquid and solid; a stiffened solution of gelatin, gum, or the like. 2. The juice of fruits or meats boiled with sugar to an elastic consistence; as, currant jelly; calf's-foot jelly.
Jenny (n.) A machine for spinning a number of threads at once, -- used in factories.
Jesse (n.) Any representation or suggestion of the genealogy of Christ, in decorative art 2. A candlestick with many branches, each of which bears the name of some one of the descendants of Jesse; -- called also tree of Jesse.
Jesus (n.) The Savior; the name of the Son of God as announced by the angel to his parents; the personal name of Our Lord, in distinction from Christ, his official appellation.
Jetty (n.) A part of a building that jets or projects beyond the rest, and overhangs the wall below. 2. A structure of wood or stone extended into the sea to influence the current or tide, or to protect a harbor; a mole; as, the Eads system of jetties at the mouth of the Mississippi River.
Jewel (n.) An ornament of dress usually made of a precious metal, and having enamel or precious stones as a part of its design. 2. A bearing for a pivot a pivot in a watch, formed of a crystal or precious stone, as a ruby.
Jewry (n.) Judea; also, a district inhabited by Jews; a Jews' quarter.
Jiffy (n.) A moment; an instant; as, I will be ready in a jiffy.
Jingo (n.) A statesman who pursues, or who favors, aggressive, domineering policy in foreign affairs.
Joint (n.) The place or part where two things or parts are joined or united; the union of two or more smooth or even surfaces admitting of a close-fitting or junction; junction as, a joint between two pieces of timber; a joint in a pipe. 2. A joining of two things or parts so as to admit of motion; an articulation, whether movable or not; a hinge; as, the knee joint; a node or joint of a stem; a ball and socket joint. See Articulation. 3. The part or space included between two joints, knots, nodes, or articulations; as, a joint of cane or of a grass stem; a joint of the leg. 4. Any one of the large pieces of meat, as cut into portions by the butcher for roasting. 5. A plane of fracture, or divisional plane, of a rock transverse to the stratification. 6. The space between the adjacent surfaces of two bodies joined and held together, as by means of cement, mortar, etc.; as, a thin joint.
Joist (n.) A piece of timber laid horizontally, or nearly so, to which the planks of the floor, or the laths or furring strips of a ceiling, are nailed; -- called, according to its position or use, binding joist, bridging joist, ceiling joist, trimming joist, etc. See Illust. of Double-framed floor, under Double, a.
Joker (n.) See Rest bower, under 2d Bower.
Jonah (n.) The Hebrew prophet, who was cast overboard as one who endangered the ship; hence, any person whose presence is unpropitious.
Jorum (n.) A large drinking vessel; also, its contents.
Jougs (n.) An iron collar fastened to a wall or post, formerly used in Scotland as a kind of pillory. [Written also juggs.] See Juke.
Joule (n.) A unit of work which is equal to 107 units of work in the C. G. S. system of units (ergs), and is practically equivalent to the energy expended in one second by an electric current of one ampere in a resistance of one ohm. One joule is approximately equal to 0.738 foot pounds.
Juger (n.) A Roman measure of land, measuring 28,800 square feet, or 240 feet in length by 120 in breadth.
Juice (n.) The characteristic fluid of any vegetable or animal substance; the sap or part which can be expressed from fruit, etc.; the fluid part which separates from meat in cooking.
Julep (n.) a sweet, demulcent, acidulous, or mucilaginous mixture, used as a vehicle. 2. A beverage composed of brandy, whisky, or some other spirituous liquor, with sugar, pounded ice, and sprigs of mint; -- called also mint julep.
Junco (n.) Any bird of the genus Junco, which includes several species of North American finches; -- called also snowbird, or blue snowbird.
Junta (n.) A council; a convention; a tribunal; an assembly; esp., the grand council of state in Spain.
Junto (n.) A secret council to deliberate on affairs of government or politics; a number of men combined for party intrigue; a faction; a cabal; as, a junto of ministers; a junto of politicians.
Jurat (n.) A person under oath; specifically, an officer of the nature of an alderman, in certain municipal corporations in England. 2. The memorandum or certificate at the end of an asffidavit, or a bill or answer in chancery, showing when, before whom, and (in English practice), where, it was sworn or affirmed.
Jurel (n.) A yellow carangoid fish of the Atlantic and Gulf coasts (Caranx chrysos), most abundant southward, where it is valued as a food fish; -- called also hardtail, horse crevalle, jack, buffalo jack, skipjack, yellow mackerel, and sometimes, improperly, horse mackerel. Other species of Caranx (as C. fallax) are also sometimes called jurel.
Juror (n.) A member of any jury for awarding prizes, etc.
Jussi (n.) A delicate fiber, produced in the Philippine Islands from an unidentified plant, of which dresses, etc., are made.
Jutes (n. pl.) Jutlanders; one of the Low German tribes, a portion of which settled in Kent, England, in the 5th century.
Jutty (n.) A projection in a building; also, a pier or mole; a jetty.
Kabob (n. & v. t.) See Cabob, n. & v. t.
Kafal (n.) The Arabian name of two trees of the genus Balsamodendron, which yield a gum resin and a red aromatic wood.
Kafir (n.) One of a race which, with the Hottentots and Bushmen, inhabit South Africa. They inhabit the country north of Cape Colony, the name being now specifically applied to the tribes living between Cape Colony and Natal; but the Zulus of Natal are true Kaffirs.
Kahau (n.) A long-nosed monkey (Semnopithecus nasalis), native of Borneo. The general color of the body is bright chestnut, with the under parts, shoulders, and sides of the head, golden yellow, and the top of the head and upper part of the back brown. Called also proboscis monkey.
Kalpa (n.) One of the Brahmanic eons, a period of 4,320,000,000 years. At the end of each Kalpa the world is annihilated.
Kauri (n.) A lofty coniferous tree of New Zealand Agathis, / Dammara, australis), furnishing valuable timber and yielding one kind of dammar resin.
Kayak (n.) A light canoe, made of skins stretched over a frame, and usually capable of carrying but one person, who sits amidships and uses a double-bladed paddle. It is peculiar to the Eskimos and other Arctic tribes.
Kedge (n.) To move (a vessel) by carrying out a kedge in a boat, dropping it overboard, and hauling the vessel up to it.
Kelpy (n.) An imaginary spirit of the waters, horselike in form, vulgarly believed to warn, by preternatural noises and lights, those who are to be drowned.
Ketch (n.) An almost obsolete form of vessel, with a mainmast and a mizzenmast, -- usually from one hundred to two hundred and fifty tons burden.
Ketol (n.) One of a series of series of complex nitrogenous substances, represented by methyl ketol and related to indol.
Khaya (n.) A lofty West African tree (Khaya Senegalensis), related to the mahogany, which it resembles in the quality of the wood. The bark is used as a febrifuge.
Kiddy (n.) A young fellow; formerly, a low thief.
Kieve (n.) See Keeve, n.
Kiosk (n.) A Turkish open summer house or pavilion, supported by pillars.
Knack (n.) Something performed, or to be done, requiring aptness and dexterity; a trick; a device.
Knave (n.) A boy; especially, a boy servant. 2. A tricky, deceitful fellow; a dishonest person; a rogue; a villain.
Kneck (n.) The twisting of a rope or cable, as it is running out.
Knell (n.) The stoke of a bell tolled at a funeral or at the death of a person; a death signal; a passing bell; hence, figuratively, a warning of, or a sound indicating, the passing away of anything. 2. To sound as a knell; especially, to toll at a death or funeral; hence, to sound as a warning or evil omen.
Knife (n.) An instrument consisting of a thin blade, usually of steel and having a sharp edge for cutting, fastened to a handle, but of many different forms and names for different uses; as, table knife, drawing knife, putty knife, pallet knife, pocketknife, penknife, chopping knife, etc..
Knock (n.) A stroke, as on a door for admittance; a rap.
Knosp (n.) Same as Knop,2.
Knout (n.) A kind of whip for flogging criminals, formerly much used in Russia. The last is a tapering bundle of leather thongs twisted with wire and hardened, so that it mangles the flesh.
Knurl (n.) One who, or that which, is crossgrained.
Koala (n.) A tailless marsupial (Phascolarctos cinereus), found in Australia. The female carries her young on the back of her neck. Called also Australian bear, native bear, and native sloth.
Konze (n.) A large African antelope (Alcelaphus Lichtensteini), allied to the hartbeest, but having shorter and flatter horns, and lacking a black patch on the face.
Koran (n.) The Scriptures of the Mohammedans, containing the professed revelations to Mohammed; -- called also Alcoran.
Kotow (n.) The prostration made by mandarins and others to their superiors, either as homage or worship, by knocking the forehead on the ground. There are degrees in the rite, the highest being expressed by three knockings.
Kraal (n.) A collection of huts within a stockade; a village; sometimes, a single hut.
Krait (n.) A very venomous snake of India (Bungarus coeruleus), allied to the cobra. Its upper parts are bluish or brownish black, often with narrow white streaks; the belly is whitish.
Krems (n.) A variety of white lead. See Krems lead, under Lead, n.
Krone (n.) A coin of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, of the value of about twenty-eight cents. See Crown, n., 9.
Label (n.) A slip of silk, paper, parchment, etc., affixed to anything, usually by an inscription, the contents, ownership, destination, etc.; as, the label of a bottle or a package. 2. A slip of ribbon, parchment, etc., attached to a document to hold the appended seal; also, the seal. 3. A writing annexed by way of addition, as a codicil added to a will. 4. A barrulet, or, rarely, a bendlet, with pendants, or points, usually three, especially used as a mark of cadency to distinguish an eldest or only son while his father is still living. 5. A brass rule with sights, formerly used, in connection with a circumferentor, to take altitudes. 6. The name now generally given to the projecting molding by the sides, and over the tops, of openings in mediaeval architecture. It always has a /quare form, as in the illustration. 7. In mediaeval art, the representation of a band or scroll containing an inscription.
Labor (n.) Physical toil or bodily exertion, especially when fatiguing, irksome, or unavoidable, in distinction from sportive exercise; hard, muscular effort directed to some useful end, as agriculture, manufactures, and like; servile toil; exertion; work. 2. Intellectual exertion; mental effort; as, the labor of compiling a history. 3. A measure of land in Mexico and Texas, equivalent to an area of 177/ acres. 4. To exert muscular strength; to exert one's strength with painful effort, particularly in servile occupations; to work; to toil. 5. To be oppressed with difficulties or disease; to do one's work under conditions which make it especially hard, wearisome; to move slowly, as against opposition, or under a burden; to be burdened; -- often with under, and formerly with of. 6. To pitch or roll heavily, as a ship in a turbulent sea.
Laird (n.) A lord; a landholder, esp. one who holds land directly of the crown.
Lamia (n.) A monster capable of assuming a woman's form, who was said to devour human beings or suck their blood; a vampire; a sorceress; a witch.
Lance (n.) A weapon of war, consisting of a long shaft or handle and a steel blade or head; a spear carried by horsemen, and often decorated with a small flag; also, a spear or harpoon used by whalers and fishermen. 2. One of the small paper cases filled with combustible composition, which mark the outlines of a figure.
Lapel (n.) That part of a garment which is turned back; specifically, the lap, or fold, of the front of a coat in continuation of collar.
Lapps (n. pl.) A branch of the Mongolian race, now living in the northern parts of Norway, Sweden, and the adjacent parts of Russia.
Lapse (n.) A gliding, slipping, or gradual falling; an unobserved or imperceptible progress or passing away,; -- restricted usually to immaterial things, or to figurative uses. 2. The termination of a right or privilege through neglect to exercise it within the limited time, or through failure of some contingency; hence, the devolution of a right or privilege.
Larch (n.) A genus of coniferous trees, having deciduous leaves, in fascicles (see Illust. of Fascicle).
Large (n.) A musical note, formerly in use, equal to two longs, four breves, or eight semibreves.
Larry (n.) Same as Lorry, or Lorrie.
Larum (n.) See Alarum, and Alarm.
Larva (n.) Any young insect from the time that it hatches from the egg until it becomes a pupa, or chrysalis. During this time it usually molts several times, and may change its form or color each time. The larvae of many insects are much like the adults in form and habits, but have no trace of wings, the rudimentary wings appearing only in the pupa stage. In other groups of insects the larvae are totally unlike the parents in structure and habits, and are called caterpillars, grubs, maggots, etc. 2. The early, immature form of any animal when more or less of a metamorphosis takes place, before the assumption of the mature shape.
Lasso (n.) A rope or long thong of leather with, a running noose, used for catching horses, cattle, etc.
Latch (n.) A movable piece which holds anything in place by entering a notch or cavity; specifically, the catch which holds a door or gate when closed, though it be not bolted.
Lates (n.) A genus of large percoid fishes, of which one species (Lates Niloticus) inhabits the Nile, and another (L. calcarifer) is found in the Ganges and other Indian rivers. They are valued as food fishes.
Latex (n.) A milky or colored juice in certain plants in cavities (called latex cells or latex tubes). It contains the peculiar principles of the plants, whether aromatic, bitter, or acid, and in many instances yields caoutchouc upon coagulation.
Lathe (n.) Formerly, a part or division of a county among the Anglo-Saxons. At present it consists of four or five hundreds, and is confined to the county of Kent. 2. A machine for turning, that is, for shaping articles of wood, metal, or other material, by causing them to revolve while acted upon by a cutting tool. 3. The movable swing frame of a loom, carrying the reed for separating the warp threads and beating up the weft; -- called also lay and batten.
Latin (n.) An exercise in schools, consisting in turning English into Latin.
Laugh (n.) An expression of mirth peculiar to the human species; the sound heard in laughing; laughter. See Laugh, v. i.
Laver (n.) The fronds of certain marine algae used as food, and for making a sauce called laver sauce. Green laver is the Ulva latissima; purple laver, Porphyra laciniata and P. vulgaris. It is prepared by stewing, either alone or with other vegetables, and with various condiments; -- called also sloke, or sloakan.
Layer (n.) One who, or that which, lays. 2. That which is laid; a stratum; a bed; one thickness, course, or fold laid over another; as, a layer of clay or of sand in the earth; a layer of bricks, or of plaster; the layers of an onion. 3. A shoot or twig of a plant, not detached from the stock, laid under ground for growth or propagation.
Leach (n.) A quantity of wood ashes, through which water passes, and thus imbibes the alkali. 2. A tub or vat for leaching ashes, bark, etc. 3. See Leech, a physician.
Leash (n.) A thong of leather, or a long cord, by which a falconer holds his hawk, or a courser his dog. 2. A brace and a half; a tierce; three; three creatures of any kind, especially greyhounds, foxes, bucks, and hares; hence, the number three in general. 3. A string with a loop at the end for lifting warp threads, in a loom.
Leave (n.) The act of leaving or departing; a formal parting; a leaving; farewell; adieu; -- used chiefly in the phrase, to take leave, i. e., literally, to take permission to go.
Leche (n.) See water buck, under 3d Buck.
Ledge (n.) A shelf on which articles may be laid; also, that which resembles such a shelf in form or use, as a projecting ridge or part, or a molding or edge in joinery. 2. A shelf, ridge, or reef, of rocks. 3. A piece of timber to support the deck, placed athwartship between beams.
Leech (n.) Any one of numerous genera and species of annulose worms, belonging to the order Hirudinea, or Bdelloidea, esp. those species used in medicine, as Hirudo medicinalis of Europe, and allied species. 2. A glass tube of peculiar construction, adapted for drawing blood from a scarified part by means of a vacuum.
Leger (n.) Anything that lies in a place; that which, or one who, remains in a place.
Leman (n.) A sweetheart, of either sex; a gallant, or a mistress; -- usually in a bad sense.
Lemma (n.) A preliminary or auxiliary proposition demonstrated or accepted for immediate use in the demonstration of some other proposition, as in mathematics or logic.
Lemon (n.) An oval or roundish fruit resembling the orange, and containing a pulp usually intensely acid. It is produced by a tropical tree of the genus Citrus, the common fruit known in commerce being that of the species C. Limonum or C. Medica (var. Limonum). There are many varieties of the fruit, some of which are sweet.
Lemur (n.) One of a family (Lemuridae) of nocturnal mammals allied to the monkeys, but of small size, and having a sharp and foxlike muzzle, and large eyes. They feed upon birds, insects, and fruit, and are mostly natives of Madagascar and the neighboring islands, one genus (Galago) occurring in Africa. The slow lemur or kukang of the East Indies is Nycticebus tardigradus. See Galago, Indris, and Colugo.
Lepas (n.) Any one of various species of Lepas, a genus of pedunculated barnacles found attached to floating timber, bottoms of ships, Gulf weed, etc.; -- called also goose barnacle. See Barnacle.
Lerot (n.) A small European rodent (Eliomys nitela), allied to the dormouse.
Letts (n. pl.) An Indo-European people, allied to the Lithuanians and Old Prussians, and inhabiting a part of the Baltic provinces of Russia.
Levee (n.) A morning assembly or reception of visitors, -- in distinction from a soiree, or evening assembly; a matinee; hence, also, any general or somewhat miscellaneous gathering of guests, whether in the daytime or evening; as, the president's levee. 2. An embankment to prevent inundation; as, the levees along the Mississippi; sometimes, the steep bank of a river.
Level (n.) A line or surface to which, at every point, a vertical or plumb line is perpendicular; a line or surface which is everywhere parallel to the surface of still water; -- this is the true level, and is a curve or surface in which all points are equally distant from the center of the earth, or rather would be so if the earth were an exact sphere. 2. A horizontal line or plane; that is, a straight line or a plane which is tangent to a true level at a given point and hence parallel to the horizon at that point; -- this is the apparent level at the given point. 3. An approximately horizontal line or surface at a certain degree of altitude, or distance from the center of the earth; as, to climb from the level of the coast to the level of the plateau and then descend to the level of the valley or of the sea. 4. Hence, figuratively, a certain position, rank, standard, degree, quality, character, etc., conceived of as in one of several planes of different elevation. 5. A uniform or average height; a normal plane or altitude; a condition conformable to natural law or which will secure a level surface; as, moving fluids seek a level. 6. An instrument by which to find a horizontal line, or adjust something with reference to a horizontal line. 7. A measurement of the difference of altitude of two points, by means of a level; as, to take a level. 8. A horizontal passage, drift, or adit, in a mine.
Lever (n.) A rigid piece which is capable of turning about one point, or axis (the fulcrum), and in which are two or more other points where forces are applied; -- used for transmitting and modifying force and motion. Specif., a bar of metal, wood, or other rigid substance, used to exert a pressure, or sustain a weight, at one point of its length, by receiving a force or power at a second, and turning at a third on a fixed point called a fulcrum. It is usually named as the first of the six mechanical powers, and is of three kinds, according as either the fulcrum F, the weight W, or the power P, respectively, is situated between the other two, as in the figures. 2. A bar, as a capstan bar, applied to a rotatory piece to turn it. 3. An arm on a rock shaft, to give motion to the shaft or to obtain motion from it.
Liana (n.) A luxuriant woody plant, climbing high trees and having ropelike stems. The grapevine often has the habit of a liane. Lianes are abundant in the forests of the Amazon region.
Libel (n.) A brief writing of any kind, esp. a declaration, bill, certificate, request, supplication, etc. 2. A malicious publication expressed either in print or in writing, or by pictures, effigies, or other signs, tending to expose another to public hatred, contempt, or ridicule. Such publication is indictable at common law. 3. A written declaration or statement by the plaintiff of his cause of action, and of the relief he seeks.
Liber (n.) The inner bark of plants, lying next to the wood. It usually contains a large proportion of woody, fibrous cells, and is, therefore, the part from which the fiber of the plant is obtained, as that of hemp, etc.
Libra (n.) The Balance; the seventh sign in the zodiac, which the sun enters at the autumnal equinox in September, marked thus / in almanacs, etc.
Liege (n.) A free and independent person; specif., a lord paramount; a sovereign.
Ligan (n.) Goods sunk in the sea, with a buoy attached in order that they may be found again. See Jetsam and Flotsam.
Light (n.) That agent, force, or action in nature by the operation of which upon the organs of sight, objects are rendered visible or luminous. 2. That which furnishes, or is a source of, light, as the sun, a star, a candle, a lighthouse, etc. 3. The time during which the light of the sun is visible; day; especially, the dawn of day. 4. The medium through which light is admitted, as a window, or window pane; a skylight; in architecture, one of the compartments of a window made by a mullion or mullions. 5. Appearance due to the particular facts and circumstances presented to view; point of view; as, to state things fairly and put them in the right light. 6. One who is conspicuous or noteworthy; a model or example; as, the lights of the age or of antiquity. 7. A firework made by filling a case with a substance which burns brilliantly with a white or colored flame; as, a Bengal light. 8. To set fire to; to cause to burn; to set burning; to ignite; to kindle; as, to light a candle or lamp; to light the gas; -- sometimes with up.
Lilac (n.) A shrub of the genus Syringa. There are six species, natives of Europe and Asia. Syringa vulgaris, the common lilac, and S. Persica, the Persian lilac, are frequently cultivated for the fragrance and beauty of their purplish or white flowers. In the British colonies various other shrubs have this name.
Limax (n.) A genus of airbreathing mollusks, including the common garden slugs. They have a small rudimentary shell. The breathing pore is on the right side of the neck. Several species are troublesome in gardens. See Slug.
Linen (n.) Made of linen; as, linen cloth; a linen stocking. 2. Thread or cloth made of flax or (rarely) of hemp; -- used in a general sense to include cambric, shirting, sheeting, towels, tablecloths, etc. 3. Underclothing, esp. the shirt, as being, in former times, chiefly made of linen.
Liner (n.) One who lines, as, a liner of shoes. 2. A vessel belonging to a regular line of packets; also, a line-of-battle ship; a ship of the line. 3. A thin piece placed between two parts to hold or adjust them, fill a space, etc.; a shim. 4. A lining within the cylinder, in which the piston works and between which and the outer shell of the cylinder a space is left to form a steam jacket. 5. A slab on which small pieces of marble, tile, etc., are fastened for grinding. 6. A ball which, when struck, flies through the air in a nearly straight line not far from the ground.
Litre (n.) A measure of capacity in the metric system, being a cubic decimeter, equal to 61.022 cubic inches, or 2.113 American pints, or 1.76 English pints.
Liver (n.) One who, or that which, lives. 2. A resident; a dweller; as, a liver in Brooklyn. 3. One whose course of life has some marked characteristic (expressed by an adjective); as, a free liver.
Livre (n.) A French money of account, afterward a silver coin equal to 20 sous. It is not now in use, having been superseded by the franc.
Llama (n.) A South American ruminant (Auchenia llama), allied to the camels, but much smaller and without a hump. It is supposed to be a domesticated variety of the guanaco. It was formerly much used as a beast of burden in the Andes.
Loach (n.) Any one of several small, fresh-water, cyprinoid fishes of the genera Cobitis, Nemachilus, and allied genera, having six or more barbules around the mouth. They are found in Europe and Asia. The common European species (N. barbatulus) is used as a food fish.
Lobby (n.) A passage or hall of communication, especially when large enough to serve also as a waiting room. It differs from an antechamber in that a lobby communicates between several rooms, an antechamber to one only; but this distinction is not carefully preserved. 2. That part of a hall of legislation not appropriated to the official use of the assembly; hence, the persons, collectively, who frequent such a place to transact business with the legislators; any persons, not members of a legislative body, who strive to influence its proceedings by personal agency. 3. A confined place for cattle, formed by hedges. trees, or other fencing, near the farmyard.
Local (n.) On newspaper cant, an item of news relating to the place where the paper is published.
Lodge (n.) A shelter in which one may rest; as: (a) A shed; a rude cabin; a hut; as, an Indian's lodge. 2. A small dwelling house, as for a gamekeeper or gatekeeper of an estate. 3. The meeting room of an association; hence, the regularly constituted body of members which meets there; as, a masonic lodge. 4. The chamber of an abbot, prior, or head of a college. 5. The space at the mouth of a level next the shaft, widened to permit wagons to pass, or ore to be deposited for hoisting; -- called also platt. 6. A family of North American Indians, or the persons who usually occupy an Indian lodge, -- as a unit of enumeration, reckoned from four to six persons; as, the tribe consists of about two hundred lodges, that is, of about a thousand individuals. 7. To give shelter or rest to; especially, to furnish a sleeping place for; to harbor; to shelter; hence, to receive; to hold. 8. To deposit for keeping or preservation; as, the men lodged their arms in the arsenal.
Loess (n.) A quaternary deposit, usually consisting of a fine yellowish earth, on the banks of the Rhine and other large rivers.
Logic (n.) The science or art of exact reasoning, or of pure and formal thought, or of the laws according to which the processes of pure thinking should be conducted; the science of the formation and application of general notions; the science of generalization, judgment, classification, reasoning, and systematic arrangement; correct reasoning. 2. A treatise on logic; as, Mill's Logic.
Looby (n.) An awkward, clumsy fellow; a lubber.
Loord (n.) A dull, stupid fellow; a drone.
Loper (n.) One who, or that which, lopes; esp., a horse that lopes. 2. A swivel at one end of a ropewalk, used in laying the strands.
Loris (n.) Any one of several species of small lemurs of the genus Stenops. They have long, slender limbs and large eyes, and are arboreal in their habits. The slender loris (S. gracilis), of Ceylon, in one of the best known species.
Lorry (n.) A small cart or wagon, as those used on the tramways in mines to carry coal or rubbish; also, a barrow or truck for shifting baggage, as at railway stations.
Lotto (n.) A game of chance, played with cards, on which are inscribed numbers, and any contrivance (as a wheel containing numbered balls) for determining a set of numbers by chance. The player holding a card having on it the set of numbers drawn from the wheel takes the stakes after a certain percentage of them has been deducted for the dealer. A variety of lotto is called keno.
Lotus (n.) A name of several kinds of water lilies; as Nelumbium speciosum, used in religious ceremonies, anciently in Egypt, and to this day in Asia; Nelumbium luteum, the American lotus; and Nymphaea Lotus and N. caerulea, the respectively white-flowered and blue-flowered lotus of modern Egypt, which, with Nelumbium speciosum, are figured on its ancient monuments. 2. The lotus of the lotuseaters, probably a tree found in Northern Africa, Sicily, Portugal, and Spain (Zizyphus Lotus), the fruit of which is mildly sweet. It was fabled by the ancients to make strangers who ate of it forget their native country, or lose all desire to return to it. 3. The lote, or nettle tree. See Lote. 4. An ornament much used in Egyptian architecture, generally asserted to have been suggested by the Egyptian water lily.
Loups (n. pl.) The Pawnees, a tribe of North American Indians whose principal totem was the wolf.
Louse (n.) Any one of numerous species of small, wingless, suctorial, parasitic insects belonging to a tribe (Pediculina), now usually regarded as degraded Hemiptera. To this group belong of the lice of man and other mammals; as, the head louse of man (Pediculus capitis), the body louse (P. vestimenti), and the crab louse (Phthirius pubis), and many others. See Crab louse, Dog louse, Cattle louse, etc., under Crab, Dog, etc. 2. Any one of numerous small mandibulate insects, mostly parasitic on birds, and feeding on the feathers. They are known as Mallophaga, or bird lice, though some occur on the hair of mammals. They are usually regarded as degraded Pseudoneuroptera. See Mallophaga. 3. Any one of the numerous species of aphids, or plant lice. See Aphid. 4. Any small crustacean parasitic on fishes. See Branchiura, and Ichthvophthira.
Lover (n.) One who loves; one who is in love; -- usually limited, in the singular, to a person of the male sex. 2. A friend; one strongly attached to another; one who greatly desires the welfare of any person or thing; as, a lover of his country. 3. One who has a strong liking for anything, as books, science, or music.
Lucid (n.) Shining; bright; resplendent; as, the lucid orbs of heaven. 2. Bright with the radiance of intellect; not darkened or confused by delirium or madness; marked by the regular operations of reason; as, a lucid interval.
Lunar (n.) The middle bone of the proximal series of the carpus; -- called also semilunar, and intermedium.
Lunch (n.) A luncheon; specifically, a light repast between breakfast and dinner.
Lunge (n.) A sudden thrust or pass, as with a sword.
Lupus (n.) The Wolf, a constellation situated south of Scorpio.
Lurch (n.) A sudden roll of a ship to one side, as in heavy weather; hence, a swaying or staggering movement to one side, as that by a drunken man. Fig.: A sudden and capricious inclination of the mind.
Lurry (n.) A confused heap; a throng, as of persons; a jumble, as of sounds.
Lymph (n.) A spring of water; hence, water, or a pure, transparent liquid like water. 2. An alkaline colorless fluid, contained in the lymphatic vessels, coagulable like blood, but free from red blood corpuscles. It is absorbed from the various tissues and organs of the body, and is finally discharged by the thoracic and right lymphatic ducts into the great veins near the heart. 3. A fibrinous material exuded from the blood vessels in inflammation. In the process of healing it is either absorbed, or is converted into connective tissue binding the inflamed surfaces together.
Lyrie (n.) A European fish (Peristethus cataphractum), having the body covered with bony plates, and having three spines projecting in front of the nose; -- called also noble, pluck, pogge, sea poacher, and armed bullhead.
Lysis (n.) The resolution or favorable termination of a disease, coming on gradually and not marked by abrupt change.
Lythe (n.) The European pollack; -- called also laith, and leet.
Lytta (n.) A fibrous and muscular band lying within the longitudinal axis of the tongue in many mammals, as the dog.
Macaw (n.) Any parrot of the genus Sittace, or Macrocercus. About eighteen species are known, all of them American. They are large and have a very long tail, a strong hooked bill, and a naked space around the eyes. The voice is harsh, and the colors are brilliant and strongly contrasted.
Macho (n.) The striped mullet of California (Mugil cephalus, / Mexicanus).
Madam (n.) A gentlewoman; -- an appellation or courteous form of address given to a lady, especially an elderly or a married lady; -- much used in the address, at the beginning of a letter, to a woman. The corresponding word in addressing a man is Sir.
Madia (n.) A genus of composite plants, of which one species (Madia sativa) is cultivated for the oil yielded from its seeds by pressure. This oil is sometimes used instead of olive oil for the table.
Magma (n.) A thick residuum obtained from certain substances after the fluid parts are expressed from them; the grounds which remain after treating a substance with any menstruum, as water or alcohol. 2. The molten matter within the earth, the source of the material of lava flows, dikes of eruptive rocks, etc. 3. The amorphous or homogenous matrix or ground mass, as distinguished from well-defined crystals; as, the magma of porphyry.
Mahdi (n.) Among Mohammedans, the last imam or leader of the faithful. The Sunni, the largest sect of the Mohammedans, believe that he is yet to appear.
Mahoe (n.) A name given to several malvaceous trees (species of Hibiscus, Ochroma, etc.), and to their strong fibrous inner bark, which is used for strings and cordage.
Maian (n.) Any spider crab of the genus Maia, or family Maiadae.
Maize (n.) A large species of American grass of the genus Zea (Z. Mays), widely cultivated as a forage and food plant; Indian corn. Also, its seed, growing on cobs, and used as food for men animals.
Maker (n.) One who makes, forms, or molds; a manufacturer; specifically, the Creator.
Malar (n.) The cheek bone, which forms a part of the lower edge of the orbit.
Maleo (n.) A bird of Celebes (megacephalon maleo), allied to the brush turkey. It makes mounds in which to lay its eggs.
Malma (n.) A spotted trout (Salvelinus malma), inhabiting Northern America, west of the Rocky Mountains; -- called also Dolly Varden trout, bull trout, red-spotted trout, and golet.
Mamma (n.) A glandular organ for secreting milk, characteristic of all mammals, but usually rudimentary in the male; a mammary gland; a breast; under; bag.
Mammy (n.) A child's name for mamma, mother.
Maneh (n.) A Hebrew weight for gold or silver, being one hundred shekels of gold and sixty shekels of silver.
Manes (n. pl.) The benevolent spirits of the dead, especially of dead ancestors, regarded as family deities and protectors.
Mange (n.) The scab or itch in cattle, dogs, and other beasts.
Mango (n.) The fruit of the mango tree. It is rather larger than an apple, and of an ovoid shape. Some varieties are fleshy and luscious, and others tough and tasting of turpentine. The green fruit is pickled for market.
Mania (n.) Excessive or unreasonable desire; insane passion affecting one or many people; as, the tulip mania.
Manid (n.) Any species of the genus Manis, or family Manidae.
Manis (n.) A genus of edentates, covered with large, hard, triangular scales, with sharp edges that overlap each other like tiles on a roof. They inhabit the warmest parts of Asia and Africa, and feed on ants. Called also Scaly anteater. See Pangolin.
Manna (n.) The food supplied to the Israelites in their journey through the wilderness of Arabia; hence, divinely supplied food. 2. A name given to lichens of the genus Lecanora, sometimes blown into heaps in the deserts of Arabia and Africa, and gathered and used as food. 3. A sweetish exudation in the form of pale yellow friable flakes, coming from several trees and shrubs and used in medicine as a gentle laxative, as the secretion of Fraxinus Ornus, and F. rotundifolia, the manna ashes of Southern Europe.
Manor (n.) The land belonging to a lord or nobleman, or so much land as a lord or great personage kept in his own hands, for the use and subsistence of his family. 2. A tract of land occupied by tenants who pay a free-farm rent to the proprietor, sometimes in kind, and sometimes by performing certain stipulated services.
Manse (n.) A dwelling house, generally with land attached.
Manul (n.) A wild cat (Felis manul), having long, soft, light-colored fur. It is found in the mountains of Central Asia, and dwells among rocks.
Manus (n.) The distal segment of the fore limb, including the carpus and fore foot or hand.
Maori (n.) One of the aboriginal inhabitants of New Zealand; also, the original language of New Zealand.
Maple (n.) A tree of the genus Acer, including about fifty species. A. saccharinum is the rock maple, or sugar maple, from the sap of which sugar is made, in the United States, in great quantities, by evaporation; the red or swamp maple is A. rubrum; the silver maple, A. dasycarpum, having fruit wooly when young; the striped maple, A. Pennsylvanium, called also moosewood. The common maple of Europe is A. campestre, the sycamore maple is A. Pseudo-platanus, and the Norway maple is A. platanoides.
Maqui (n.) A Chilian shrub (Aristotelia Maqui). Its bark furnishes strings for musical instruments, and a medicinal wine is made from its berries.
March (n.) The third month of the year, containing thirty-one days. 2. A territorial border or frontier; a region adjacent to a boundary line; a confine; -- used chiefly in the plural, and in English history applied especially to the border land on the frontiers between England and Scotland, and England and Wales. 3. Hence: Measured and regular advance or movement, like that of soldiers moving in order; stately or deliberate walk; steady onward movement. 4. The distance passed over in marching; as, an hour's march; a march of twenty miles.
Marsh (n.) A tract of soft wet land, commonly covered partially or wholly with water; a fen; a swamp; a morass.
Mason (n.) One whose occupation is to build with stone or brick; also, one who prepares stone for building purposes.
Match (n.) Anything used for catching and retaining or communicating fire, made of some substance which takes fire readily, or remains burning some time; esp., a small strip or splint of wood dipped at one end in a substance which can be easily ignited by friction, as a preparation of phosphorus or chlorate of potassium.
Mater (n.) See Alma mater, Dura mater, and Pia mater.
Matte (n.) A partly reduced copper sulphide, obtained by alternately roasting and melting copper ore in separating the metal from associated iron ores, and called coarse metal, fine metal, etc., according to the grade of fineness. On the exterior it is dark brown or black, but on a fresh surface is yellow or bronzy in color. 2. A dead or dull finish, as in gilding where the gold leaf is not burnished, or in painting where the surface is purposely deprived of gloss.
Maund (n.) An East Indian weight, varying in different localities from 25 to about 82 pounds avoirdupois.
Mauve (n.) A color of a delicate purple, violet, or lilac.
Maxim (n.) The longest note formerly used, equal to two longs, or four breves; a large.
Mease (n.) Five hundred; as, a mease of herrings.
Medal (n.) A piece of metal in the form of a coin, struck with a device, and intended to preserve the remembrance of a notable event or an illustrious person, or to serve as a reward.
Media (n.) One of the sonant mutes /, /, / (b, d, g), in Greek, or of their equivalents in other languages, so named as intermediate between the tenues, /, /, / (p, t, k), and the aspiratae (aspirates) /, /, / (ph or f, th, ch). Also called middle mute, or medial, and sometimes soft mute.
Medic (n.) A leguminous plant of the genus Medicago. The black medic is the Medicago lupulina; the purple medic, or lucern, is M. sativa.
Medoc (n.) A class of claret wines, including several varieties, from the district of Medoc in the department of Gironde.
Meiny (n.) A family, including servants, etc.; household; retinue; train.
Melam (n.) A white or buff-colored granular powder, C6H9N11, obtained by heating ammonium sulphocyanate.
Melon (n.) The juicy fruit of certain cucurbitaceous plants, as the muskmelon, watermelon, and citron melon; also, the plant that produces the fruit. 2. A large, ornamental, marine, univalve shell of the genus Melo.
Mercy (n.) Forbearance to inflict harm under circumstances of provocation, when one has the power to inflict it; compassionate treatment of an offender or adversary; clemency. 2. Compassionate treatment of the unfortunate and helpless; sometimes, favor, beneficence.
Merit (n.) Reward deserved; any mark or token of excellence or approbation; as, his teacher gave him ten merits. 2. To earn by service or performance; to have a right to claim as reward; to deserve; sometimes, to deserve in a bad sense; as, to merit punishment.
Merou (n.) See Jack, 8 (c).
Meson (n.) The mesial plane dividing the body of an animal into similar right and left halves. The line in which it meets the dorsal surface has been called the dorsimeson, and the corresponding ventral edge the ventrimeson.
Metal (n.) An elementary substance, as sodium, calcium, or copper, whose oxide or hydroxide has basic rather than acid properties, as contrasted with the nonmetals, or metalloids. No sharp line can be drawn between the metals and nonmetals, and certain elements partake of both acid and basic qualities, as chromium, manganese, bismuth, etc. 2. The substance of which anything is made; material; hence, constitutional disposition; character; temper.
Meter (n.) One who, or that which, metes or measures. See Coal-meter. 2. An instrument for measuring, and usually for recording automatically, the quantity measured. 3. A line above or below a hanging net, to which the net is attached in order to strengthen it.
Metre (n.) Rhythmical arrangement of syllables or words into verses, stanzas, strophes, etc.; poetical measure, depending on number, quantity, and accent of syllables; rhythm; measure; verse; also, any specific rhythmical arrangements; as, the Horatian meters; a dactylic meter. 2. A measure of length, equal to 39.37 English inches, the standard of linear measure in the metric system of weights and measures. It was intended to be, and is very nearly, the ten millionth part of the distance from the equator to the north pole, as ascertained by actual measurement of an arc of a meridian. See Metric system, under Metric.
Metic (n.) A sojourner; an immigrant; an alien resident in a Grecian city, but not a citizen.
Meute (n.) A cage for hawks; a mew. See 4th Mew, 1.
Midas (n.) A genus of longeared South American monkeys, including numerous species of marmosets. See Marmoset.
Midge (n.) Any one of many small, delicate, long-legged flies of the Chironomus, and allied genera, which do not bite. Their larvae are usually aquatic. 2. A very small fly, abundant in many parts of the United States and Canada, noted for the irritating quality of its bite.
Midst (n.) The interior or central part or place; the middle; -- used chiefly in the objective case after in; as, in the midst of the forest. 2. Hence, figuratively, the condition of being surrounded or beset; the press; the burden; as, in the midst of official duties; in the midst of secular affairs.
Mimic (n.) One who imitates or mimics, especially one who does so for sport; a copyist; a buffoon.
Mince (n.) A short, precise step; an affected manner.
Miner (n.) One who mines; a digger for metals, etc.; one engaged in the business of getting ore, coal, or precious stones, out of the earth; one who digs military mines; as, armies have sappers and miners. 2. Any of numerous insects which, in the larval state, excavate galleries in the parenchyma of leaves. They are mostly minute moths and dipterous flies. 3. The chattering, or garrulous, honey eater of Australia (Myzantha garrula).
Minim (n.) Anything very minute; as, the minims of existence; -- applied to animalcula; and the like. 2. The smallest liquid measure, equal to about one drop; the sixtieth part of a fluid drachm. 3. A time note, formerly the shortest in use; a half note, equal to half a semibreve, or two quarter notes or crotchets.
Minor (n.) A person of either sex who has not attained the age at which full civil rights are accorded; an infant; in England and the United States, one under twenty-one years of age. 2. The minor term, that is, the subject of the conclusion; also, the minor premise, that is, that premise which contains the minor term; in hypothetical syllogisms, the categorical premise. It is the second proposition of a regular syllogism, as in the following: Every act of injustice partakes of meanness; to take money from another by gaming is an act of injustice; therefore, the taking of money from another by gaming partakes of meanness.
Minos (n.) A king and lawgiver of Crete, fabled to be the son of Jupiter and Europa. After death he was made a judge in the Lower Regions.
Mirza (n.) The common title of honor in Persia, prefixed to the surname of an individual. When appended to the surname, it signifies Prince.
Miser (n.) A covetous, grasping, mean person; esp., one having wealth, who lives miserably for the sake of saving and increasing his hoard.
Missy (n.) An affectionate, or contemptuous, form of miss; a young girl; a miss.
Mitre (n.) A covering for the head, worn on solemn occasions by church dignitaries. It has been made in many forms, the present form being a lofty cap with two points or peaks. 2. The surface forming the beveled end or edge of a piece where a miter joint is made; also, a joint formed or a junction effected by two beveled ends or edges; a miter joint.
Mixer (n.) One who, or that which, mixes.
Mocha (n.) A seaport town of Arabia, on the Red Sea. 2. An Abyssinian weight, equivalent to a Troy grain.
Model (n.) A miniature representation of a thing, with the several parts in due proportion; sometimes, a facsimile of the same size. 2. Something intended to serve, or that may serve, as a pattern of something to be made; a material representation or embodiment of an ideal; sometimes, a drawing; a plan; as, the clay model of a sculpture; the inventor's model of a machine. 3. Anything which serves, or may serve, as an example for imitation; as, a government formed on the model of the American constitution; a model of eloquence, virtue, or behavior. 4. Any copy, or resemblance, more or less exact.
Moder (n.) The principal piece of an astrolabe, into which the others are fixed.
Modus (n.) The arrangement of, or mode of expressing, the terms of a contract or conveyance. 2. A qualification involving the idea of variation or departure from some general rule or form, in the way of either restriction or enlargement, according to the circumstances of the case, as in the will of a donor, an agreement between parties, and the like. 3. A fixed compensation or equivalent given instead of payment of tithes in kind, expressed in full by the phrase modus decimandi.
Mogul (n.) A heavy locomotive for freight traffic, having three pairs of connected driving wheels and a two-wheeled truck.
Mohur (n.) A British Indian gold coin, of the value of fifteen silver rupees, or $7.21.
Moire (n.) Originally, a fine textile fabric made of the hair of an Asiatic goat; afterwards, any textile fabric to which a watered appearance is given in the process of calendering. 2. A watered, clouded, or frosted appearance produced upon either textile fabrics or metallic surfaces.
Molar (n.) Any one of the teeth back of the incisors and canines. The molar which replace the deciduous or milk teeth are designated as premolars, and those which are not preceded by deciduous teeth are sometimes called true molars. See Tooth.
Mould (n.) A growth of minute fungi of various kinds, esp. those of the great groups Hyphomycetes, and Physomycetes, forming on damp or decaying organic matter. 2. The matrix, or cavity, in which anything is shaped, and from which it takes its form; also, the body or mass containing the cavity; as, a sand mold; a jelly mold. 3. That on which, or in accordance with which, anything is modeled or formed; anything which serves to regulate the size, form, etc., as the pattern or templet used by a shipbuilder, carpenter, or mason. 4. A group of moldings; as, the arch mold of a porch or doorway; the pier mold of a Gothic pier, meaning the whole profile, section, or combination of parts. 5. A frame with a wire cloth bottom, on which the pump is drained to form a sheet, in making paper by hand.
Moult (n.) The act or process of changing the feathers, hair, skin, etc.; molting.
Monad (n.) An ultimate atom, or simple, unextended point; something ultimate and indivisible. 2. The elementary and indestructible units which were conceived of as endowed with the power to produce all the changes they undergo, and thus determine all physical and spiritual phenomena. 3. One of the smallest flangellate Infusoria; esp., the species of the genus Monas, and allied genera. 4. A simple, minute organism; a primary cell, germ, or plastid. 5. An atom or radical whose valence is one, or which can combine with, be replaced by, or exchanged for, one atom of hydrogen.
Monal (n.) Any Asiatic pheasant of the genus Lophophorus, as the Impeyan pheasant.
Monas (n.) A genus of minute flagellate Infusoria of which there are many species, both free and attached. See Illust. under Monad.
Money (n.) A piece of metal, as gold, silver, copper, etc., coined, or stamped, and issued by the sovereign authority as a medium of exchange in financial transactions between citizens and with government; also, any number of such pieces; coin. 2. Any written or stamped promise, certificate, or order, as a government note, a bank note, a certificate of deposit, etc., which is payable in standard coined money and is lawfully current in lieu of it; in a comprehensive sense, any currency usually and lawfully employed in buying and selling. 3. In general, wealth; property; as, he has much money in land, or in stocks; to make, or lose, money.
Monte (n.) A favorite gambling game among Spaniards, played with dice or cards.
Month (n.) One of the twelve portions into which the year is divided; the twelfth part of a year, corresponding nearly to the length of a synodic revolution of the moon, -- whence the name. In popular use, a period of four weeks is often called a month.
Moose (n.) A large cervine mammal (Alces machlis, or A. Americanus), native of the Northern United States and Canada. The adult male is about as large as a horse, and has very large, palmate antlers. It closely resembles the European elk, and by many zoologists is considered the same species. See Elk.
Mopsy (n.) A slatternly, untidy woman.
Moral (n.) The inner meaning or significance of a fable, a narrative, an occurrence, an experience, etc.; the practical lesson which anything is designed or fitted to teach; the doctrine meant to be inculcated by a fiction; a maxim. 2. A morality play. See Morality, 5.
Morel (n.) An edible fungus (Morchella esculenta), the upper part of which is covered with a reticulated and pitted hymenium. It is used as food, and for flavoring sauces.
Morin (n.) A yellow crystalline substance of acid properties extracted from fustic (Maclura tinctoria, formerly called Morus tinctoria); -- called also moric acid.
Morne (n.) The first or early part of the day, variously understood as the earliest hours of light, the time near sunrise; the time from midnight to noon, from rising to noon, etc. 2. The first or early part; as, the morning of life.
Morus (n.) A genus of trees, some species of which produce edible fruit; the mulberry. See Mulberry.
Moses (n.) A large flatboat, used in the West Indies for taking freight from shore to ship.
Motor (n.) One who, or that which, imparts motion; a source of mechanical power. 2. A prime mover; a machine by means of which a source of power, as steam, moving water, electricity, etc., is made available for doing mechanical work.
Motto (n.) A sentence, phrase, or word, forming part of an heraldic achievment. 2. A sentence, phrase, or word, prefixed to an essay, discourse, chapter, canto, or the like, suggestive of its subject matter; a short, suggestive expression of a guiding principle; a maxim.
Mound (n.) A ball or globe forming part of the regalia of an emperor or other sovereign. It is encircled with bands, enriched with precious stones, and surmounted with a cross; -- called also globe. 2. An artificial hill or elevation of earth; a raised bank; an embarkment thrown up for defense; a bulwark; a rampart; also, a natural elevation appearing as if thrown up artificially; a regular and isolated hill, hillock, or knoll.
Mount (n.) To get up on anything, as a platform or scaffold; especially, to seat one's self on a horse for riding.
Mouse (n.) Any one of numerous species of small rodents belonging to the genus Mus and various related genera of the family Muridae. The common house mouse (Mus musculus) is found in nearly all countries. The American white-footed, or deer, mouse (Hesperomys leucopus) sometimes lives in houses. See Dormouse, Meadow mouse, under Meadow, and Harvest mouse, under Harvest. 2. Same as 2d Mousing, 2.
Mouth (n.) The opening through which an animal receives food; the aperture between the jaws or between the lips; also, the cavity, containing the tongue and teeth, between the lips and the pharynx; the buccal cavity. 2. The opening of a vessel by which it is filled or emptied, charged or discharged; as, the mouth of a jar or pitcher; the mouth of the lacteal vessels, etc. 3. The opening or entrance of any cavity, as a cave, pit, well, or den. 4. The opening of a piece of ordnance, through which it is discharged. 5. The crosspiece of a bridle bit, which enters the mouth of an animal.
Mover (n.) A person or thing that moves, stirs, or changes place. 2. A person or thing that imparts motion, or causes change of place; a motor. 3. One who, or that which, excites, instigates, or causes movement, change, etc.; as, movers of sedition. 4. A proposer; one who offers a proposition, or recommends anything for consideration or adoption; as, the mover of a resolution in a legislative body.
Mower (n.) One who, or that which, mows; a mowing machine; as, a lawn mower.
Moxie (n.) courage, determination. 2. Know-how, expertise.
Moyle (n. & v.) See Moil, and Moile.
Mucin (n.) An albuminoid substance which is contained in mucus, and gives to the latter secretion its peculiar ropy character. It is found in all the secretions from mucous glands, and also between the fibers of connective tissue, as in tendons. See Illust. of Demilune.
Mucro (n.) A minute abrupt point, as of a leaf; any small, sharp point or process, terminating a larger part or organ.
Mucus (n.) A viscid fluid secreted by mucous membranes, which it serves to moisten and protect. It covers the lining membranes of all the cavities which open externally, such as those of the mouth, nose, lungs, intestinal canal, urinary passages, etc. 2. Any other animal fluid of a viscid quality, as the synovial fluid, which lubricates the cavities of the joints; -- improperly so used.
Mudar (n.) Either one of two asclepiadaceous shrubs (Calotropis gigantea, and C. procera), which furnish a strong and valuable fiber. The acrid milky juice is used medicinally.
Mulch (n.) Half-rotten straw, or any like substance strewn on the ground, as over the roots of plants, to protect from heat, drought, etc., and to preserve moisture.
Mulct (n.) A fine or penalty, esp. a pecuniary punishment or penalty.
Muley (n.) A stiff, long saw, guided at the ends but not stretched in a gate.
Mummy (n.) A dead body embalmed and dried after the manner of the ancient Egyptians; also, a body preserved, by any means, in a dry state, from the process of putrefaction. 2. A sort of wax used in grafting, etc.
Munga (n.) See Bonnet monkey, under Bonnet.
Murex (n.) A genus of marine gastropods, having rough, and frequently spinose, shells, which are often highly colored inside; the rock shells. They abound in tropical seas.
Murre (n.) Any one of several species of sea birds of the genus Uria, or Catarractes; a guillemot.
Murza (n.) One of the hereditary nobility among the Tatars, esp. one of the second class.
Musar (n.) An itinerant player on the musette, an instrument formerly common in Europe.
Musca (n.) A genus of dipterous insects, including the common house fly, and numerous allied species.
Musci (n. pl.) An order or subclass of cryptogamous plants; the mosses. See Moss, and Cryptogamia.
Music (n.) The science and the art of tones, or musical sounds, i. e., sounds of higher or lower pitch, begotten of uniform and synchronous vibrations, as of a string at various degrees of tension; the science of harmonical tones which treats of the principles of harmony, or the properties, dependences, and relations of tones to each other; the art of combining tones in a manner to please the ear.
Musty (n.) Having the rank, pungent, offencive odor and taste which substances of organic origin acquire during warm, moist weather; foul or sour and fetid; moldy; as, musty corn; musty books.
Myrrh (n.) A gum resin, usually of a yellowish brown or amber color, of an aromatic odor, and a bitter, slightly pungent taste. It is valued for its odor and for its medicinal properties. It exudes from the bark of a shrub of Abyssinia and Arabia, the Balsamodendron Myrrha. The myrrh of the Bible is supposed to have been partly the gum above named, and partly the exudation of species of Cistus, or rockrose.
Mysis (n.) A genus of small schizopod shrimps found both in fresh and salt water; the opossum shrimps. One species inhabits the Great Lakes of North America, and is largely eaten by the whitefish. The marine species form part of the food of right whales.
Nabob (n.) One who returns to Europe from the East with immense riches: hence, any man of great wealth.
Nacre (n.) A pearly substance which lines the interior of many shells, and is most perfect in the mother-of-pearl. [Written also nacker and naker.] See Pearl, and Mother-of-pearl.
Nadir (n.) That point of the heavens, or lower hemisphere, directly opposite the zenith; the inferior pole of the horizon; the point of the celestial sphere directly under the place where we stand.
Navus (n.) A spot or mark on the skin of children when born; a birthmark; -- usually applied to vascular tumors, i. e., those consisting mainly of blood vessels, as dilated arteries, veins, or capillaries.
Naiad (n.) A water nymph; one of the lower female divinities, fabled to preside over some body of fresh water, as a lake, river, brook, or fountain. 2. Any species of a tribe (Naiades) of freshwater bivalves, including Unio, Anodonta, and numerous allied genera; a river mussel. 3. Any plant of the order Naiadaceae, such as eelgrass, pondweed, etc.
Namer (n.) One who names, or calls by name.
Nanny (n.) A diminutive of Ann or Anne, the proper name.
Nappe (n.) Sheet; surface; all that portion of a surface that is continuous in such a way that it is possible to pass from any one point of the portion to any other point of the portion without leaving the surface. Thus, some hyperboloids have one nappe, and some have two.
Nappy (n.) A round earthen dish, with a flat bottom and sloping sides.
Nares (n. pl.) The nostrils or nasal openings, -- the anterior nares being the external or proper nostrils, and the posterior nares, the openings of the nasal cavities into the mouth or pharynx.
Nasal (n.) An elementary sound which is uttered through the nose, or through both the nose and the mouth simultaneously. 2. A plate, or scale, on the nose of a fish, etc.
Nassa (n.) Any species of marine gastropods, of the genera Nassa, Tritia, and other allied genera of the family Nassidae; a dog whelk. See Illust. under Gastropoda.
Natch (n.) The rump of beef; esp., the lower and back part of the rump.
Navew (n.) A kind of small turnip, a variety of Brassica campestris. See Brassica.
Navvy (n.) Originally, a laborer on canals for internal navigation; hence, a laborer on other public works, as in building railroads, embankments, etc.
Nawab (n.) A deputy ruler or viceroy in India; also, a title given by courtesy to other persons of high rank in the East.
Negro (n.) A black man; especially, one of a race of black or very dark persons who inhabit the greater part of tropical Africa, and are distinguished by crisped or curly hair, flat noses, and thick protruding lips; also, any black person of unmixed African blood, wherever found.
Negus (n.) A beverage made of wine, water, sugar, nutmeg, and lemon juice; -- so called, it is said, from its first maker, Colonel Negus.
Nerve (n.) One of the whitish and elastic bundles of fibers, with the accompanying tissues, which transmit nervous impulses between nerve centers and various parts of the animal body. 2. Steadiness and firmness of mind; self-command in personal danger, or under suffering; unshaken courage and endurance; coolness; pluck; resolution. 3. One of the principal fibrovascular bundles or ribs of a leaf, especially when these extend straight from the base or the midrib of the leaf. 4. One of the nervures, or veins, in the wings of insects.
Newel (n.) The upright post about which the steps of a circular staircase wind; hence, in stairs having straight flights, the principal post at the foot of a staircase, or the secondary ones at the landings. See Hollow newel, under Hollow.
Niche (n.) A cavity, hollow, or recess, generally within the thickness of a wall, for a statue, bust, or other erect ornament. hence, any similar position, literal or figurative.
Nidor (n.) Scent or savor of meat or food, cooked or cooking.
Nidus (n.) A nest: a repository for the eggs of birds, insects, etc.; a breeding place; esp., the place or substance where parasites or the germs of a disease effect lodgment or are developed.
Niece (n.) A relative, in general; especially, a descendant, whether male or female; a granddaughter or a grandson. 2. A daughter of one's brother or sister, or of one's brother-in-law or sister-in-law.
Night (n.) That part of the natural day when the sun is beneath the horizon, or the time from sunset to sunrise; esp., the time between dusk and dawn, when there is no light of the sun, but only moonlight, starlight, or artificial light. 2. A state of affliction; adversity; as, a dreary night of sorrow. 3. A lifeless or unenlivened period, as when nature seems to sleep.
Niobe (n.) The daughter of Tantalus, and wife of Amphion, king of Thebes. Her pride in her children provoked Apollo and Diana, who slew them all. Niobe herself was changed by the gods into stone.
Niopo (n.) A kind of snuff prepared by the natives of Venezuela from the roasted seeds of a leguminous tree (Piptadenia peregrina), thence called niopo tree.
Nisan (n.) The first month of the jewish ecclesiastical year, formerly answering nearly to the month of April, now to March, of the Christian calendar. See Abib.
Nizam (n.) The title of the native sovereigns of Hyderabad, in India, since 1719.
Noble (n.) An English money of account, and, formerly, a gold coin, of the value of 6 s. 8 d. sterling, or about $1.61.
Noddy (n.) Any tern of the genus Anous, as A. stolidus.
Noise (n.) Especially, loud, confused, or senseless sound; clamor; din. 2. Music, in general; a concert; also, a company of musicians; a band.
Nomad (n.) One of a race or tribe that has no fixed location, but wanders from place to place in search of pasture or game.
Nonda (n.) The edible plumlike fruit of the Australian tree, Parinarium Nonda.
Nones (n. pl.) The fifth day of the months January, February, April, June, August, September, November, and December, and the seventh day of March, May, July, and October. The nones were nine days before the ides, reckoning inclusively, according to the Roman method. 2. The canonical office, being a part of the Breviary, recited at noon (formerly at the ninth hour, 3 P. M.) in the Roman Catholic Church.
Nonyl (n.) The hydrocarbon radical, C9H19, derived from nonane and forming many compounds. Used also adjectively; as, nonyl alcohol.
Noose (n.) A running knot, or loop, which binds the closer the more it is drawn.
Nopal (n.) A cactaceous plant (Nopalea cochinellifera), originally Mexican, on which the cochineal insect feeds, and from which it is collected. The name is sometimes given to other species of Cactaceae.
Noria (n.) A large water wheel, turned by the action of a stream against its floats, and carrying at its circumference buckets, by which water is raised and discharged into a trough; used in Arabia, China, and elsewhere for irrigating land; a Persian wheel.
Norna (n.) One of the three Fates, Past, Present, and Future. Their names were Urd, Verdandi, and Skuld.
North (n.) That one of the four cardinal points of the compass, at any place, which lies in the direction of the true meridian, and to the left hand of a person facing the east; the direction opposite to the south.
Notch (n.) A narrow passage between two elevation; a deep, close pass; a defile; as, the notch of a mountain.
Novum (n.) A game at dice, properly called novem quinque (L., nine five), the two principal throws being nine and five.
Nowel (n.) Christmas; also, a shout of joy at Christmas for the birth of the Savior. 2. A kind of hymn, or canticle, of mediaeval origin, sung in honor of the Nativity of our Lord; a Christmas carol. 3. The core, or the inner part, of a mold for casting a large hollow object. 4. The bottom part of a mold or of a flask, in distinction from the cope; the drag.
Noyau (n.) A cordial of brandy, etc., flavored with the kernel of the bitter almond, or of the peach stone, etc.
Nubia (n.) A light fabric of wool, worn on the head by women; a cloud.
Nudge (n.) A gentle push, or jog, as with the elbow.
Nurse (n.) One who nourishes; a person who supplies food, tends, or brings up; as: (a) A woman who has the care of young children; especially, one who suckles an infant not her own. (b) A person, especially a woman, who has the care of the sick or infirm. 2. One who, or that which, brings up, rears, causes to grow, trains, fosters, or the like. 3. A lieutenant or first officer, who is the real commander when the captain is unfit for his place. 4. A peculiar larva of certain trematodes which produces cercariae by asexual reproduction. See Cercaria, and Redia.
Nymph (n.) A goddess of the mountains, forests, meadows, or waters. 2. Any one of a subfamily (Najades) of butterflies including the purples, the fritillaries, the peacock butterfly, etc.; -- called also naiad.
Oakum (n.) The material obtained by untwisting and picking into loose fiber old hemp ropes; -- used for calking the seams of ships, stopping leaks, etc.
Oasis (n.) A fertile or green spot in a waste or desert, esp. in a sandy desert.
Obole (n.) A weight of twelve grains; or, according to some, of ten grains, or half a scruple.
Obolo (n.) A copper coin, used in the Ionian Islands, about one cent in value.
Ocean (n.) The whole body of salt water which covers more than three fifths of the surface of the globe; -- called also the sea, or great sea. 2. One of the large bodies of water into which the great ocean is regarded as divided, as the Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, Arctic and Antarctic oceans. 3. An immense expanse; any vast space or quantity without apparent limits; as, the boundless ocean of eternity; an ocean of affairs.
Ochre (n.) A impure earthy ore of iron or a ferruginous clay, usually red (hematite) or yellow (limonite), -- used as a pigment in making paints, etc. The name is also applied to clays of other colors. 2. A metallic oxide occurring in earthy form; as, tungstic ocher or tungstite.
Octad (n.) An atom or radical which has a valence of eight, or is octavalent.
Octet (n.) A composition for eight parts, usually for eight solo instruments or voices.
Octyl (n.) A hypothetical hydrocarbon radical regarded as an essential residue of octane, and as entering into its derivatives; as, octyl alcohol.
Odeon (n.) A kind of theater in ancient Greece, smaller than the dramatic theater and roofed over, in which poets and musicians submitted their works to the approval of the public, and contended for prizes; -- hence, in modern usage, the name of a hall for musical or dramatic performances.
Odium (n.) Hatred; dislike; as, his conduct brought him into odium, or, brought odium upon him.
Oelet (n.) An eye, bud, or shoot, as of a plant; an oilet.
Ogham (n.) A particular kind of writing practiced by the ancient Irish, and found in inscriptions on stones, metals, etc.
Oiler (n.) One who, or that which, oils.
Olein (n.) A fat, liquid at ordinary temperatures, but solidifying at temperatures below 0 C., found abundantly in both the animal and vegetable kingdoms (see Palmitin). It dissolves solid fats, especially at 30-40 C. Chemically, olein is a glyceride of oleic acid; and, as three molecules of the acid are united to one molecule of glyceryl to form the fat, it is technically known as triolein. It is also called elain.
Oliva (n.) A genus of polished marine gastropod shells, chiefly tropical, and often beautifully colored.
Olive (n.) A tree (Olea Europaea) with small oblong or elliptical leaves, axillary clusters of flowers, and oval, one-seeded drupes. The tree has been cultivated for its fruit for thousands of years, and its branches are the emblems of peace. The wood is yellowish brown and beautifully variegated. 2. The fruit of the olive. It has been much improved by cultivation, and is used for making pickles. Olive oil is pressed from its flesh. 3. The color of the olive, a peculiar dark brownish, yellowish, or tawny green. 4. One of the tertiary colors, composed of violet and green mixed in equal strength and proportion. 5. A small slice of meat seasoned, rolled up, and cooked; as, olives of beef or veal.
Ombre (n.) A game at cards, borrowed from the Spaniards, and usually played by three persons. 2. A large Mediterranean food fish (Umbrina cirrhosa): -- called also umbra, and umbrine.
Omega (n.) The last; the end; hence, death.
Onion (n.) A liliaceous plant of the genus Allium (A. cepa), having a strong-flavored bulb and long hollow leaves; also, its bulbous root, much used as an article of food. The name is often extended to other species of the genus.
Onset (n.) A rushing or setting upon; an attack; an assault; a storming; especially, the assault of an army. 2. Anything set on, or added, as an ornament or as a useful appendage.
Opera (n.) A drama, either tragic or comic, of which music forms an essential part; a drama wholly or mostly sung, consisting of recitative, arials, choruses, duets, trios, etc., with orchestral accompaniment, preludes, and interludes, together with appropriate costumes, scenery, and action; a lyric drama. 2. The score of a musical drama, either written or in print; a play set to music.
Opium (n.) The inspissated juice of the Papaver somniferum, or white poppy.
Orbit (n.) The path described by a heavenly body in its periodical revolution around another body; as, the orbit of Jupiter, of the earth, of the moon.
Orcin (n.) A colorless crystalline substance, C6H3.CH3.(OH)2, which is obtained from certain lichens (Roccella, Lecanora, etc.), also from extract of aloes, and artificially from certain derivatives of toluene. It changes readily into orcein.
Order (n.) Of material things, like the books in a library. 2. Of intellectual notions or ideas, like the topics of a discource. 3. Of periods of time or occurrences, and the like. 4. Right arrangement; a normal, correct, or fit condition; as, the house is in order; the machinery is out of order. 5. The customary mode of procedure; established system, as in the conduct of debates or the transaction of business; usage; custom; fashion. 6. Conformity with law or decorum; freedom from disturbance; general tranquillity; public quiet; as, to preserve order in a community or an assembly. 7. That which prescribes a method of procedure; a rule or regulation made by competent authority; as, the rules and orders of the senate. 8. Hence: A commission to purchase, sell, or supply goods; a direction, in writing, to pay money, to furnish supplies, to admit to a building, a place of entertainment, or the like; as, orders for blankets are large. 9. A number of things or persons arranged in a fixed or suitable place, or relative position; a rank; a row; a grade; especially, a rank or class in society; a group or division of men in the same social or other position; also, a distinct character, kind, or sort; as, the higher or lower orders of society; talent of a high order. 10. A body of persons having some common honorary distinction or rule of obligation; esp., a body of religious persons or aggregate of convents living under a common rule; as, the Order of the Bath; the Franciscan order. 11. An ecclesiastical grade or rank, as of deacon, priest, or bishop; the office of the Christian ministry; -- often used in the plural; as, to take orders, or to take holy orders, that is, to enter some grade of the ministry. 12. The disposition of a column and its component parts, and of the entablature resting upon it, in classical architecture; hence (as the column and entablature are the characteristic features of classical architecture) a style or manner of architectural designing. 13. An assemblage of genera having certain important characters in common; as, the Carnivora and Insectivora are orders of Mammalia. 14. Rank; degree; thus, the order of a curve or surface is the same as the degree of its equation. 15. To put in order; to reduce to a methodical arrangement; to arrange in a series, or with reference to an end. Hence, to regulate; to dispose; to direct; to rule. 16. To give an order to; to command; as, to order troops to advance. 17. To give an order for; to secure by an order; as, to order a carriage; to order groceries.
Organ (n.) An instrument or medium by which some important action is performed, or an important end accomplished; as, legislatures, courts, armies, taxgatherers, etc., are organs of government. 2. A natural part or structure in an animal or a plant, capable of performing some special action (termed its function), which is essential to the life or well-being of the whole; as, the heart, lungs, etc., are organs of animals; the root, stem, foliage, etc., are organs of plants. 3. A component part performing an essential office in the working of any complex machine; as, the cylinder, valves, crank, etc., are organs of the steam engine. 4. A medium of communication between one person or body and another; as, the secretary of state is the organ of communication between the government and a foreign power; a newspaper is the organ of its editor, or of a party, sect, etc. 5. A wind instrument containing numerous pipes of various dimensions and kinds, which are filled with wind from a bellows, and played upon by means of keys similar to those of a piano, and sometimes by foot keys or pedals; -- formerly used in the plural, each pipe being considired an organ.
Orgue (n.) Any one of a number of long, thick pieces of timber, pointed and shod with iron, and suspended, each by a separate rope, over a gateway, to be let down in case of attack. 2. A piece of ordnance, consisting of a number of musket barrels arranged so that a match or train may connect with all their touchholes, and a discharge be secured almost or quite simultaneously.
Oriel (n.) A small apartment next a hall, where certain persons were accustomed to dine; a sort of recess.
Orion (n.) A large and bright constellation on the equator, between the stars Aldebaran and Sirius. It contains a remarkable nebula visible to the naked eye.
Orlop (n.) The lowest deck of a vessel, esp. of a ship of war, consisting of a platform laid over the beams in the hold, on which the cables are coiled.
Orpin (n.) A yellow pigment of various degrees of intensity, approaching also to red.
Orris (n.) A peculiar pattern in which gold lace or silver lace is worked; especially, one in which the edges are ornamented with conical figures placed at equal distances, with spots between them.
Osier (n.) A kind of willow (Salix viminalis) growing in wet places in Europe and Asia, and introduced into North America. It is considered the best of the willows for basket work. The name is sometimes given to any kind of willow. 2. One of the long, pliable twigs of this plant, or of other similar plants.
Otter (n.) Any carnivorous animal of the genus Lutra, and related genera. Several species are described. They have large, flattish heads, short ears, and webbed toes. They are aquatic, and feed on fish. Their fur is soft and valuable. The common otter of Europe is Lutra vulgaris; the American otter is L. Canadensis; other species inhabit South America and Asia.
Ounce (n.) A weight, the sixteenth part of a pound avoirdupois, and containing 437/ grains. 2. A feline quadruped (Felis irbis, / uncia) resembling the leopard in size, and somewhat in color, but it has longer and thicker fur, which forms a short mane on the back. The ounce is pale yellowish gray, with irregular dark spots on the neck and limbs, and dark rings on the body. It inhabits the lofty mountain ranges of Asia. Called also once.
Ousel (n.) One of several species of European thrushes, especially the blackbird (Merula merula, or Turdus merula), and the mountain or ring ousel (Turdus torquatus).
Outgo (n.) That which goes out, or is paid out; outlay; expenditure; -- the opposite of income.
Ovary (n.) That part of the pistil which contains the seed, and in most flowering plants develops into the fruit. See Illust. of Flower.
Ovolo (n.) A round, convex molding. See Illust. of Column.
Ovule (n.) The rudiment of a seed. It grows from a placenta, and consists of a soft nucleus within two delicate coatings. The attached base of the ovule is the hilum, the coatings are united with the nucleus at the chalaza, and their minute orifice is the foramen.
Owlet (n.) A small owl; especially, the European species (Athene noctua), and the California flammulated owlet (Megascops flammeolus).
Owner (n.) One who owns; a rightful proprietor; one who has the legal or rightful title, whether he is the possessor or not.
Owser (n.) Tanner's ooze. See Ooze, 3.
Oxbow (n.) A frame of wood, bent into the shape of the letter U, and embracing an ox's neck as a kind of collar, the upper ends passing through the bar of the yoke; also, anything so shaped, as a bend in a river.
Oxeye (n.) A titmouse, especially the great titmouse (Parus major) and the blue titmouse (P. coeruleus). 2. A fish; the bogue, or box.
Oxide (n.) A binary compound of oxygen with an atom or radical, or a compound which is regarded as binary; as, iron oxide, ethyl oxide, nitrogen oxide, etc.
Oxlip (n.) The great cowslip (Primula veris, var. elatior).
Oxter (n.) The armpit; also, the arm.
Ozena (n.) A discharge of fetid matter from the nostril, particularly if associated with ulceration of the soft parts and disease of the bones of the nose.
Ozone (n.) A colorless gaseous substance (O/) obtained (as by the silent discharge of electricity in oxygen) as an allotropic form of oxygen, containing three atoms in the molecule. It is a streng oxidizer, and probably exists in the air, though by he ordinary tests it is liable to be confused with certain other substances, as hydrogen dioxide, or certain oxides of nitrogen. It derives its name from its peculiar odor, which resembles that of weak chlorine.
Pacer (n.) One who, or that which, paces; especially, a horse that paces.
Pacos (n.) An earthy-looking ore, consisting of brown oxide of iron with minute particles of native silver.
Padge (n.) The barn owl; -- called also pudge, and pudge owl.
Padow (n.) A paddock, or toad.
Paean (n.) An ancient Greek hymn in honor of Apollo as a healing deity, and, later, a song addressed to other deities.
Paeon (n.) A foot of four syllables, one long and three short, admitting of four combinations, according to the place of the long syllable.
Pagan (n.) One who worships false gods; an idolater; a heathen; one who is neither a Christian, a Mohammedan, nor a Jew. 2. Of or pertaining to pagans; relating to the worship or the worshipers of false goods; heathen; idolatrous, as, pagan tribes or superstitions.
Pagod (n.) A pagoda. [R.] ""Or some queer pagod.""
Pains (n.) Labor; toilsome effort; care or trouble taken; -- plural in form, but used with a singular or plural verb, commonly the former.
Paint (n.) The same prepared with a vehicle, as oil, water with gum, or the like, for application to a surface.
Palea (n.) One of the chaffy scales or bractlets growing on the receptacle of many compound flowers, as the Coreopsis, the sunflower, etc. 2. A pendulous process of the skin on the throat of a bird, as in the turkey; a dewlap.
Palla (n.) An oblong rectangular piece of cloth, worn by Roman ladies, and fastened with brooches.
Palet (n.) A perpendicular band upon an escutcheon, one half the breadth of the pale.
Palsy (n.) Paralysis, complete or partial. See Paralysis.
Panda (n.) A small Asiatic mammal (Ailurus fulgens) having fine soft fur. It is related to the bears, and inhabits the mountains of Northern India.
Panel (n.) A sunken compartment with raised margins, molded or otherwise, as in ceilings, wainscotings, etc. 2. A piece of parchment or a schedule, containing the names of persons summoned as jurors by the sheriff; hence, more generally, the whole jury. 3. Formerly, a piece of cloth serving as a saddle; hence, a soft pad beneath a saddletree to prevent chafing. 4. A board having its edges inserted in the groove of a surrounding frame; as, the panel of a door. 5. A slab or plank of wood upon which, instead of canvas, a picture is painted. 6. One of the districts divided by pillars of extra size, into which a mine is laid off in one system of extracting coal. 7. A plain strip or band, as of velvet or plush, placed at intervals lengthwise on the skirt of a dress, for ornament. 8. A portion of a framed structure between adjacent posts or struts, as in a bridge truss.
Panic (n.) A plant of the genus Panicum; panic grass; also, the edible grain of some species of panic grass.
Pansy (n.) A plant of the genus Viola (V. tricolor) and its blossom, originally purple and yellow. Cultivated varieties have very large flowers of a great diversity of colors. Called also heart's-ease, love-in-idleness, and many other quaint names.
Paolo (n.) An old Italian silver coin, worth about ten cents.
Papaw (n.) A tree (Carica Papaya) of tropical America, belonging to the order Passifloreae. It has a soft, spongy stem, eighteen or twenty feet high, crowned with a tuft of large, long-stalked, palmately lobed leaves. The milky juice of the plant is said to have the property of making meat tender. Also, its dull orange-colored, melon-shaped fruit, which is eaten both raw and cooked or pickled. 2. A tree of the genus Asimina (A. triloba), growing in the western and southern parts of the United States, and producing a sweet edible fruit; also, the fruit itself.
Paper (n.) A substance in the form of thin sheets or leaves intended to be written or printed on, or to be used in wrapping. It is made of rags, straw, bark, wood, or other fibrous material, which is first reduced to pulp, then molded, pressed, and dried. 2. A sheet, leaf, or piece of such substance. 3. A printed or written instrument; a document, essay, or the like; a writing; as, a paper read before a scientific society. 4. A printed sheet appearing periodically; a newspaper; a journal; as, a daily paper. 5. Negotiable evidences of indebtedness; notes; bills of exchange, and the like; as, the bank holds a large amount of his paper. 6. Decorated hangings or coverings for walls, made of paper. See Paper hangings, below. 7. A paper containing (usually) a definite quantity; as, a paper of pins, tacks, opium, etc. 8. A medicinal preparation spread upon paper, intended for external application; as, cantharides paper.
Pardo (n.) A money of account in Goa, India, equivalent to about 2s. 6d. sterling. or 60 cts.
Parol (n.) Oral declaration; word of mouth; also, a writing not under seal.
Parry (n.) A warding off of a thrust or blow, as in sword and bayonet exercises or in boxing; hence, figuratively, a defensive movement in debate or other intellectual encounter.
Parse (n.) To resolve into its elements, as a sentence, pointing out the several parts of speech, and their relation to each other by government or agreement; to analyze and describe grammatically.
Pasha (n.) An honorary title given to officers of high rank in Turkey, as to governers of provinces, military commanders, etc. The earlier form was bashaw.
Paspy (n.) A kind of minuet, in triple time, of French origin, popular in the reign of Queen Elizabeth and for some time after; -- called also passing measure, and passymeasure.
Paste (n.) A soft composition, as of flour moistened with water or milk, or of earth moistened to the consistence of dough, as in making potter's ware. 2. Specifically, in cookery, a dough prepared for the crust of pies and the like; pastry dough. 3. A kind of cement made of flour and water, starch and water, or the like, -- used for uniting paper or other substances, as in bookbinding, etc., -- also used in calico printing as a vehicle for mordant or color. 4. A highly refractive vitreous composition, variously colored, used in making imitations of precious stones or gems. See Strass. 5. A soft confection made of the inspissated juice of fruit, licorice, or the like, with sugar, etc.
Pasty (n.) A pie consisting usually of meat wholly surrounded with a crust made of a sheet of paste, and often baked without a dish; a meat pie.
Patch (n.) A piece of cloth, or other suitable material, sewed or otherwise fixed upon a garment to repair or strengthen it, esp. upon an old garment to cover a hole. 2. A small piece of anything used to repair a breach; as, a patch on a kettle, a roof, etc. 3. A small piece of black silk stuck on the face, or neck, to hide a defect, or to heighten beauty. 4. A piece of greased cloth or leather used as wrapping for a rifle ball, to make it fit the bore. 5. Fig.: Anything regarded as a patch; a small piece of ground; a tract; a plot; as, scattered patches of trees or growing corn. 6. A block on the muzzle of a gun, to do away with the effect of dispart, in sighting.
Paten (n.) The place on which the consecrated bread is placed in the Eucharist, or on which the host is placed during the Mass. It is usually small, and formed as to fit the chalice, or cup, as a cover.
Patio (n.) A paved yard or floor where ores are cleaned and sorted, or where ore, salt, mercury, etc., are trampled by horses, to effect intermixture and amalgamation.
Paugy (n.) The scup. See Porgy, and Scup.
Pause (n.) In speaking or reading aloud, a brief arrest or suspension of voice, to indicate the limits and relations of sentences and their parts. 2. In writing and printing, a mark indicating the place and nature of an arrest of voice in reading; a punctuation point; as, teach the pupil to mind the pauses. 3. A hold. See 4th Hold, 7. 4. To be intermitted; to cease; as, the music pauses. 5. To stop in order to consider; hence, to consider; to reflect.
Pauxi (n.) A curassow (Ourax pauxi), which, in South America, is often domesticated.
Pavon (n.) A small triangular flag, esp. one attached to a knight's lance; a pennon.
Payee (n.) The person to whom money is to be, or has been, paid; the person named in a bill or note, to whom, or to whose order, the amount is promised or directed to be paid. See Bill of exchange, under Bill.
Payer (n.) One who pays; specifically, the person by whom a bill or note has been, or should be, paid.
Peach (n.) A well-known high-flavored juicy fruit, containing one or two seeds in a hard almond-like endocarp or stone; also, the tree which bears it (Prunus, / Amygdalus Persica). In the wild stock the fruit is hard and inedible.
Pearl (n.) A shelly concretion, usually rounded, and having a brilliant luster, with varying tints, found in the mantle, or between the mantle and shell, of certain bivalve mollusks, especially in the pearl oysters and river mussels, and sometimes in certain univalves. It is usually due to a secretion of shelly substance around some irritating foreign particle. Its substance is the same as nacre, or mother-of-pearl. Pearls which are round, or nearly round, and of fine luster, are highly esteemed as jewels, and compare in value with the precious stones. 2. Hence, figuratively, something resembling a pearl; something very precious. 3. Nacre, or mother-of-pearl. 4. A capsule of gelatin or similar substance containing some liquid for medicinal application, as ether. 5. A size of type, between agate and diamond.
Pecan (n.) A species of hickory (Carya olivaeformis), growing in North America, chiefly in the Mississippi valley and in Texas, where it is one of the largest of forest trees; also, its fruit, a smooth, oblong nut, an inch or an inch and a half long, with a thin shell and well-flavored meat.
Peele (n.) A graceful and swift South African antelope (Pelea capreola). The hair is woolly, and ash-gray on the back and sides. The horns are black, long, slender, straight, nearly smooth, and very sharp. Called also rheeboc, and rehboc.
Pekan (n.) See Fisher, 2.
Pelta (n.) A small shield, especially one of an approximately elliptic form, or crescent-shaped.
Penis (n.) The male member, or organ of generation.
Penna (n.) A perfect, or normal, feather.
Penny (n.) An English coin, formerly of copper, now of bronze, the twelfth part of an English shilling in account value, and equal to four farthings, or about two cents; -- usually indicated by the abbreviation d. (the initial of denarius). 2. Money, in general; as, to turn an honest penny.
Peony (n.) A plant, and its flower, of the ranunculaceous genus Paeonia. Of the four or five species, one is a shrub; the rest are perennial herbs with showy flowers, often double in cultivation.
Perca (n.) A genus of fishes, including the fresh-water perch.
Perch (n.) Any fresh-water fish of the genus Perca and of several other allied genera of the family Percidae, as the common American or yellow perch (Perca flavescens, / Americana), and the European perch (P. fluviatilis). 2. Any one of numerous species of spiny-finned fishes belonging to the Percidae, Serranidae, and related families, and resembling, more or less, the true perches. 3. A pole; a long staff; a rod; esp., a pole or other support for fowls to roost on or to rest on; a roost; figuratively, any elevated resting place or seat. 4. A measure of length containing five and a half yards; a rod, or pole. 5. In solid measure: A mass 16/ feet long, 1 foot in height, and 1/ feet in breadth, or 24/ cubic feet (in local use, from 22 to 25 cubic feet); -- used in measuring stonework.
Peril (n.) Danger; risk; hazard; jeopardy; exposure of person or property to injury, loss, or destruction.
Petal (n.) One of the leaves of the corolla, or the colored leaves of a flower. See Corolla, and Illust. of Flower.
Peter (n.) A common baptismal name for a man. The name of one of the apostles,
Pewee (n.) A common American tyrant flycatcher (Sayornis phoebe, or S. fuscus). Called also pewit, and phoebe.
Pewit (n.) The European black-headed, or laughing, gull (Xema ridibundus). See under Laughing.
Phare (n.) Hence, a harbor.
Phase (n.) That which is exhibited to the eye; the appearance which anything manifests, especially any one among different and varying appearances of the same object. 2. Any appearance or aspect of an object of mental apprehension or view; as, the problem has many phases. 3. A particular appearance or state in a regularly recurring cycle of changes with respect to quantity of illumination or form of enlightened disk; as, the phases of the moon or planets. See Illust. under Moon. 4. Any one point or portion in a recurring series of changes, as in the changes of motion of one of the particles constituting a wave or vibration; one portion of a series of such changes, in distinction from a contrasted portion, as the portion on one side of a position of equilibrium, in contrast with that on the opposite side.
Pheon (n.) A bearing representing the head of a dart or javelin, with long barbs which are engrailed on the inner edge.
Phial (n.) A glass vessel or bottle, especially a small bottle for medicines; a vial.
Phlox (n.) A genus of American herbs, having showy red, white, or purple flowers.
Physa (n.) A genus of fresh-water Pulmonifera, having reversed spiral shells. See Pond snail, under Pond.
Picea (n.) A genus of coniferous trees of the northen hemisphere, including the Norway spruce and the American black and white spruces. These trees have pendent cones, which do not readily fall to pieces, in this and other respects differing from the firs.
Picra (n.) The powder of aloes with canella, formerly officinal, employed as a cathartic.
Picts (n. pl.) A race of people of uncertain origin, who inhabited Scotland in early times.
Picul (n.) A commercial weight varying in different countries and for different commodities. In Borneo it is 135/ lbs.; in China and Sumatra, 133/ lbs.; in Japan, 133/ lbs.; but sometimes 130 lbs., etc. Called also, by the Chinese, tan.
Picus (n.) A genus of woodpeckers, including some of the common American and European species.
Piece (n.) A fragment or part of anything separated from the whole, in any manner, as by cutting, splitting, breaking, or tearing; a part; a portion; as, a piece of sugar; to break in pieces. 2. A definite portion or quantity, as of goods or work; as, a piece of broadcloth; a piece of wall paper. 3. A literary or artistic composition; as, a piece of poetry, music, or statuary. 4. A musket, gun, or cannon; as, a battery of six pieces; a following piece. 5. A coin; as, a sixpenny piece; -- formerly applied specifically to an English gold coin worth 22 shillings. 6. A fact; an item; as, a piece of news; a piece of knowledge. 7. An individual; -- applied to a person as being of a certain nature or quality; often, but not always, used slightingly or in contempt. 8. One of the superior men, distinguished from a pawn.
Pieta (n.) A representation of the dead Christ, attended by the Virgin Mary or by holy women and angels.
Piety (n.) Veneration or reverence of the Supreme Being, and love of his character; loving obedience to the will of God, and earnest devotion to his service. 2. Duty; dutifulness; filial reverence and devotion; affectionate reverence and service shown toward parents, relatives, benefactors, country, etc.
Pilch (n.) A gown or case of skin, or one trimmed or lined with fur.
Piles (n. pl.) The small, troublesome tumors or swellings about the anus and lower part of the rectum which are technically called hemorrhoids. See Hemorrhoids. [The singular pile is sometimes used.]
Pilot (n.) Specifically, a person duly qualified, and licensed by authority, to conduct vessels into and out of a port, or in certain waters, for a fixed rate of fees.
Pinax (n.) A tablet; a register; hence, a list or scheme inscribed on a tablet.
Pinch (n.) A close compression, as with the ends of the fingers, or with an instrument; a nip. 2. As much as may be taken between the finger and thumb; any very small quantity; as, a pinch of snuff. 3. A lever having a projection at one end, acting as a fulcrum, -- used chiefly to roll heavy wheels, etc. Called also pinch bar.
Pinna (n.) A leaflet of a pinnate leaf. See Illust. of Bipinnate leaf, under Bipinnate. 2. Any species of Pinna, a genus of large bivalve mollusks found in all warm seas. The byssus consists of a large number of long, silky fibers, which have been used in manufacturing woven fabrics, as a curiosity.
Pinus (n.) A large genus of evergreen coniferous trees, mostly found in the northern hemisphere. The genus formerly included the firs, spruces, larches, and hemlocks, but is now limited to those trees which have the primary leaves of the branchlets reduced to mere scales, and the secondary ones (pine needles) acicular, and usually in fascicles of two to seven. See Pine.
Piper (n.) One who plays on a pipe, or the like, esp. on a bagpipe. 2. A common European gurnard (Trigla lyra), having a large head, with prominent nasal projection, and with large, sharp, opercular spines. 3. A sea urchin (Goniocidaris hystrix) having very long spines, native of both the American and European coasts.
Pipit (n.) Any one of numerous species of small singing birds belonging to Anthus and allied genera, of the family Motacillidae. They strongly resemble the true larks in habits, colors, and the great length of the hind claw. They are, therefore, often called titlarks, and pipit larks.
Pipra (n.) Any one of numerous species of small clamatorial birds belonging to Pipra and allied genera, of the family Pipridae. The male is usually glossy black, varied with scarlet, yellow, or sky blue. They chiefly inhabit South America.
Pique (n.) A cotton fabric, figured in the loom, -- used as a dress goods for women and children, and for vestings, etc. 2. A feeling of hurt, vexation, or resentment, awakened by a social slight or injury; irritation of the feelings, as through wounded pride; stinging vexation. 3. In piquet, the right of the elder hand to count thirty in hand, or to play before the adversary counts one.
Pitch (n.) A thick, black, lustrous, and sticky substance obtained by boiling down tar. It is used in calking the seams of ships; also in coating rope, canvas, wood, ironwork, etc., to preserve them. 2. A throw; a toss; a cast, as of something from the hand; as, a good pitch in quoits. 3. A point or peak; the extreme point or degree of elevation or depression; hence, a limit or bound. 4. The point where a declivity begins; hence, the declivity itself; a descending slope; the degree or rate of descent or slope; slant; as, a steep pitch in the road; the pitch of a roof. 5. The relative acuteness or gravity of a tone, determined by the number of vibrations which produce it; the place of any tone upon a scale of high and low. 6. The distance from center to center of any two adjacent teeth of gearing, measured on the pitch line; -- called also circular pitch. 7. The length, measured along the axis, of a complete turn of the thread of a screw, or of the helical lines of the blades of a screw propeller. 8. The distance between the centers of holes, as of rivet holes in boiler plates.
Pitta (n.) Any one of a large group of bright-colored clamatorial birds belonging to Pitta, and allied genera of the family Pittidae. Most of the species are varied with three or more colors, such as blue, green, crimson, yellow, purple, and black. They are called also ground thrushes, and Old World ant thrushes; but they are not related to the true thrushes.
Pivot (n.) A fixed pin or short axis, on the end of which a wheel or other body turns. 2. The end of a shaft or arbor which rests and turns in a support; as, the pivot of an arbor in a watch. 3. Hence, figuratively: A turning point or condition; that on which important results depend; as, the pivot of an enterprise.
Pixie (n.) A low creeping evergreen plant (Pyxidanthera barbulata), with mosslike leaves and little white blossoms, found in New Jersey and southward, where it flowers in earliest spring.
Place (n.) Any portion of space regarded as measured off or distinct from all other space, or appropriated to some definite object or use; position; ground; site; spot; rarely, unbounded space. 2. A position which is occupied and held; a dwelling; a mansion; a village, town, or city; a fortified town or post; a stronghold; a region or country. 3. Rank; degree; grade; order of priority, advancement, dignity, or importance; especially, social rank or position; condition; also, official station; occupation; calling. 4. Ordinal relation; position in the order of proceeding; as, he said in the first place. 5. Position in the heavens, as of a heavenly body; -- usually defined by its right ascension and declination, or by its latitude and longitude. 6. To assign a place to; to put in a particular spot or place, or in a certain relative position; to direct to a particular place; to fix; to settle; to locate; as, to place a book on a shelf; to place balls in tennis. 7. To put or set in a particular rank, office, or position; to surround with particular circumstances or relations in life; to appoint to certain station or condition of life; as, in whatever sphere one is placed. 8. To put out at interest; to invest; to loan; as, to place money in a bank. 9. To set; to fix; to repose; as, to place confidence in a friend.
Plack (n.) A small copper coin formerly current in Scotland, worth less than a cent.
Plaid (n.) A rectangular garment or piece of cloth, usually made of the checkered material called tartan, but sometimes of plain gray, or gray with black stripes. It is worn by both sexes in Scotland.
Plait (n.) A flat fold; a doubling, as of cloth; a pleat; as, a box plait. 2. A braid, as of hair or straw; a plat.
Plank (n.) A broad piece of sawed timber, differing from a board only in being thicker. See Board. 2. Fig.: That which supports or upholds, as a board does a swimmer. 3. One of the separate articles in a declaration of the principles of a party or cause; as, a plank in the national platform.
Plant (n.) A vegetable; an organized living being, generally without feeling and voluntary motion, and having, when complete, a root, stem, and leaves, though consisting sometimes only of a single leafy expansion, or a series of cellules, or even a single cellule. 2. A bush, or young tree; a sapling; hence, a stick or staff. 3. The whole machinery and apparatus employed in carrying on a trade or mechanical business; also, sometimes including real estate, and whatever represents investment of capital in the means of carrying on a business, but not including material worked upon or finished products; as, the plant of a foundry, a mill, or a railroad. 4. An oyster which has been bedded, in distinction from one of natural growth. 5. To put in the ground and cover, as seed for growth; as, to plant maize. 6. To set in the ground for growth, as a young tree, or a vegetable with roots. 7. To furnish, or fit out, with plants; as, to plant a garden, an orchard, or a forest. 8. To furnish with a fixed and organized population; to settle; to establish; as, to plant a colony. 9. To introduce and establish the principles or seeds of; as, to plant Christianity among the heathen. 10. To set firmly; to fix; to set and direct, or point; as, to plant cannon against a fort; to plant a standard in any place; to plant one's feet on solid ground; to plant one's fist in another's face.
Plash (n.) The branch of a tree partly cut or bent, and bound to, or intertwined with, other branches.
Plate (n.) A flat, or nearly flat, piece of metal, the thickness of which is small in comparison with the other dimensions; a thick sheet of metal; as, a steel plate. 2. Domestic vessels and utensils, as flagons, dishes, cups, etc., wrought in gold or silver. 3. Metallic ware which is plated, in distinction from that which is genuine silver or gold. 4. A small, shallow, and usually circular, vessel of metal or wood, or of earth glazed and baked, from which food is eaten at table. 5. A piece of money, usually silver money. 6. A piece of metal on which anything is engraved for the purpose of being printed; hence, an impression from the engraved metal; as, a book illustrated with plates; a fashion plate. 7. A page of stereotype, electrotype, or the like, for printing from; as, publisher's plates. 8. That part of an artificial set of teeth which fits to the mouth, and holds the teeth in place. It may be of gold, platinum, silver, rubber, celluloid, etc. 9. A horizontal timber laid upon a wall, or upon corbels projecting from a wall, and supporting the ends of other timbers; also used specifically of the roof plate which supports the ends of the roof trusses or, in simple work, the feet of the rafters. 10. A sheet of glass, porcelain, metal, etc., with a coating that is sensitive to light.
Platt (n.) See Lodge, n.
Playa (n.) A beach; a strand; in the plains and deserts of Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, a broad, level spot, on which subsequently becomes dry by evaporation.
Plitt (n.) An instrument of punishment or torture resembling the knout, used in Russia.
Ploce (n.) A figure in which a word is separated or repeated by way of emphasis, so as not only to signify the individual thing denoted by it, but also its peculiar attribute or quality; as, ""His wife's a wife indeed.""
Pluck (n.) The heart, liver, and lights of an animal. 2. The act of plucking, or the state of being plucked, at college. See Pluck, v. t., 4.
Pluff (n.) A puff, as of smoke from a pipe, or of dust from a puffball; a slight explosion, as of a small quantity of gunpowder. 2. A hairdresser's powder puff; also, the act of using it.
Plumb (n.) A little mass or weight of lead, or the like, attached to a line, and used by builders, etc., to indicate a vertical direction; a plummet; a plumb bob. See Plumb line, below.
Plump (n.) A knot; a cluster; a group; a crowd; a flock; as, a plump of trees, fowls, or spears.
Plush (n.) A textile fabric with a nap or shag on one side, longer and softer than the nap of velvet.
Pluto (n.) The son of Saturn and Rhea, brother of Jupiter and Neptune; the dark and gloomy god of the Lower World.
Plyer (n.) One who, or that which, plies
Poake (n.) Waste matter from the preparation of skins, consisting of hair, lime, oil, etc.
Poesy (n.) The art of composing poems; poetical skill or faculty; as, the heavenly gift of poesy.
Point (n.) That which pricks or pierces; the sharp end of anything, esp. the sharp end of a piercing instrument, as a needle or a pin. 2. An instrument which pricks or pierces, as a sort of needle used by engravers, etchers, lace workers, and others; also, a pointed cutting tool, as a stone cutter's point; -- called also pointer. 3. Anything which tapers to a sharp, well-defined termination. Specifically: A small promontory or cape; a tract of land extending into the water beyond the common shore line. 4. The mark made by the end of a sharp, piercing instrument, as a needle; a prick. 5. An indefinitely small space; a mere spot indicated or supposed. Specifically: (Geom.) That which has neither parts nor magnitude; that which has position, but has neither length, breadth, nor thickness, -- sometimes conceived of as the limit of a line; that by the motion of which a line is conceived to be produced. 6. An indivisible portion of time; a moment; an instant; hence, the verge. 7. A mark of punctuation; a character used to mark the divisions of a composition, or the pauses to be observed in reading, or to point off groups of figures, etc.; a stop, as a comma, a semicolon, and esp. a period; hence, figuratively, an end, or conclusion. 8. Whatever serves to mark progress, rank, or relative position, or to indicate a transition from one state or position to another, degree; step; stage; hence, position or condition attained; as, a point of elevation, or of depression; the stock fell off five points; he won by tenpoints. 9. That which arrests attention, or indicates qualities or character; a salient feature; a characteristic; a peculiarity; hence, a particular; an item; a detail; as, the good or bad points of a man, a horse, a book, a story, etc. 10. Hence, the most prominent or important feature, as of an argument, discourse, etc.; the essential matter; esp., the proposition to be established; as, the point of an anecdote. 11. A dot or mark distinguishing or characterizing certain tones or styles; as, points of perfection, of augmentation, etc.; hence, a note; a tune. 12. A dot placed at the right hand of a note, to raise its value, or prolong its time, by one half, as to make a whole note equal to three half notes, a half note equal to three quarter notes. 13. A fixed conventional place for reference, or zero of reckoning, in the heavens, usually the intersection of two or more great circles of the sphere, and named specifically in each case according to the position intended; as, the equinoctial points; the solstitial points; the nodal points; vertical points, etc. See Equinoctial Nodal. 14. One of the points of the compass (see Points of the compass, below); also, the difference between two points of the compass; as, to fall off a point. 15. A short piece of cordage used in reefing sails. See Reef point, under Reef. 16. Lace wrought the needle; as, point de Venise; Brussels point. See Point lace, below. 17. A fielder who is stationed on the off side, about twelve or fifteen yards from, and a little in advance of, the batsman. 18. The attitude assumed by a pointer dog when he finds game; as, the dog came to a point. See Pointer. 19. A standard unit of measure for the size of type bodies, being one twelfth of the thickness of pica type. See Point system of type, under Type. 20. A movement executed with the saber or foil; as, tierce point. 21. To give a point to; to sharpen; to cut, forge, grind, or file to an acute end; as, to point a dart, or a pencil. Used also figuratively; as, to point a moral. 22. To direct toward an abject; to aim; as, to point a gun at a wolf, or a cannon at a fort. 23. Hence, to direct the attention or notice of. 24. To supply with punctuation marks; to punctuate; as, to point a composition. 25. To give particular prominence to; to designate in a special manner; to indicate, as if by pointing; as, the error was pointed out. 26. To indicate or discover by a fixed look, as game. 27. To fill up and finish the joints of (a wall), by introducing additional cement or mortar, and bringing it to a smooth surface. 28. To cut, as a surface, with a pointed tool.
Poise (n.) To balance; to make of equal weight; as, to poise the scales of a balance. 2. To ascertain, as by the balance; to weigh.
Poker (n.) That which pokes or is used in poking, especially a metal bar or rod used in stirring a fire of coals. 2. A game at cards derived from brag, and first played about 1835 in the Southwestern United States. 3. Any imagined frightful object, especially one supposed to haunt the darkness; a bugbear.
Polar (n.) The right line drawn through the two points of contact of the two tangents drawn from a given point to a given conic section. The given point is called the pole of the line. If the given point lies within the curve so that the two tangents become imaginary, there is still a real polar line which does not meet the curve, but which possesses other properties of the polar. Thus the focus and directrix are pole and polar. There are also poles and polar curves to curves of higher degree than the second, and poles and polar planes to surfaces of the second degree.
Polka (n.) A dance of Polish origin, but now common everywhere. It is performed by two persons in common time. 2. A lively Bohemian or Polish dance tune in 2-4 measure, with the third quaver accented.
Polly (n.) A woman's name; also, a popular name for a parrot.
Polyp (n.) Same as Anthozoa. See Anthozoa, Madreporaria, Hydroid.
Pomey (n.) A figure supposed to resemble an apple; a roundel, -- always of a green color.
Pongo (n.) Any large ape; especially, the chimpanzee and the orang-outang.
Poppy (n.) Any plant or species of the genus Papaver, herbs with showy polypetalous flowers and a milky juice. From one species (Papaver somniferum) opium is obtained, though all the species contain it to some extent; also, a flower of the plant. See Illust. of Capsule.
Porch (n.) A covered and inclosed entrance to a building, whether taken from the interior, and forming a sort of vestibule within the main wall, or projecting without and with a separate roof. Sometimes the porch is large enough to serve as a covered walk. See also Carriage porch, under Carriage, and Loggia.
Porgy (n.) The sailor's choice, or pinfish. 2. Any one of several species of embiotocoids, or surf fishes, of the Pacific coast. The name is also given locally to several other fishes, as the bur fish.
Porte (n.) The Ottoman court; the government of the Turkish empire, officially called the Sublime Porte, from the gate (port) of the sultan's palace at which justice was administered.
Poser (n.) One who, or that which, puzzles; a difficult or inexplicable question or fact.
Potto (n.) A nocturnal mammal (Perodictius potto) of the Lemur family, found in West Africa. It has rudimentary forefingers. Called also aposoro, and bush dog.
Pouch (n.) A small bag; usually, a leathern bag; as, a pouch for money; a shot pouch; a mail pouch, etc. 2. That which is shaped like, or used as, a pouch 3. A sac or bag for carrying food or young; as, the cheek pouches of certain rodents, and the pouch of marsupials. 4. A silicle, or short pod, as of the shepherd's purse. 5. A bulkhead in the hold of a vessel, to prevent grain, etc., from shifting.
Poult (n.) A young chicken, partridge, grouse, or the like.
Pound (n.) An inclosure, maintained by public authority, in which cattle or other animals are confined when taken in trespassing, or when going at large in violation of law; a pinfold. 2. A kind of net, having a large inclosure with a narrow entrance into which fish are directed by wings spreading outward. 3. A certain specified weight; especially, a legal standard consisting of an established number of ounces. 4. A British denomination of money of account, equivalent to twenty shillings sterling, and equal in value to about $4.86. There is no coin known by this name, but the gold sovereign is of the same value.
Powen (n.) A small British lake whitefish (Coregonus clupeoides, or C. ferus); -- called also gwyniad and lake herring.
Power (n.) Same as Poor, the fish. 2. Ability to act, regarded as latent or inherent; the faculty of doing or performing something; capacity for action or performance; capability of producing an effect, whether physical or moral: potency; might; as, a man of great power; the power of capillary attraction; money gives power. 3. Ability, regarded as put forth or exerted; strength, force, or energy in action; as, the power of steam in moving an engine; the power of truth, or of argument, in producing conviction; the power of enthusiasm. 4. Capacity of undergoing or suffering; fitness to be acted upon; susceptibility; -- called also passive power; as, great power of endurance. 5. The agent exercising an ability to act; an individual invested with authority; an institution, or government, which exercises control; as, the great powers of Europe; hence, often, a superhuman agent; a spirit; a divinity. 6. A large quantity; a great number; as, a power o/ good things. 7. The rate at which mechanical energy is exerted or mechanical work performed, as by an engine or other machine, or an animal, working continuously; as, an engine of twenty horse power. 8. A mechanical agent; that from which useful mechanical energy is derived; as, water power; steam power; hand power, etc. 9. Applied force; force producing motion or pressure; as, the power applied at one and of a lever to lift a weight at the other end. 10. A machine acted upon by an animal, and serving as a motor to drive other machinery; as, a dog power. 11. The product arising from the multiplication of a number into itself; as, a square is the second power, and a cube is third power, of a number. 12. Mental or moral ability to act; one of the faculties which are possessed by the mind or soul; as, the power of thinking, reasoning, judging, willing, fearing, hoping, etc. 13. The degree to which a lens, mirror, or any optical instrument, magnifies; in the telescope, and usually in the microscope, the number of times it multiplies, or augments, the apparent diameter of an object; sometimes, in microscopes, the number of times it multiplies the apparent surface. 14. Hence, vested authority to act in a given case; as, the business was referred to a committee with power.
Praam (n.) A flat-bottomed boat or lighter, -- used in Holland and the Baltic, and sometimes armed in case of war.
Prank (n.) A gay or sportive action; a ludicrous, merry, or mischievous trick; a caper; a frolic.
Prawn (n.) Any one of numerous species of large shrimplike Crustacea having slender legs and long antennae. They mostly belong to the genera Pandalus, Palaemon, Palaemonetes, and Peneus, and are much used as food. The common English prawn is Palaemon serratus.
Preen (n.) To dress with, or as with, a preen; to trim or dress with the beak, as the feathers; -- said of birds. 2. To trim up, as trees.
Press (n.) An East Indian insectivore (Tupaia ferruginea). It is arboreal in its habits, and has a bushy tail. The fur is soft, and varies from rusty red to maroon and to brownish black. 2. To force into service, particularly into naval service; to impress. 3. A commission to force men into public service, particularly into the navy. 4. An apparatus or machine by which any substance or body is pressed, squeezed, stamped, or shaped, or by which an impression of a body is taken; sometimes, the place or building containing a press or presses. 5. Specifically, a printing press. 6. The art or business of printing and publishing; hence, printed publications, taken collectively, more especially newspapers or the persons employed in writing for them; as, a free press is a blessing, a licentious press is a curse. 7. An upright case or closet for the safe keeping of articles; as, a clothes press. 8. Urgent demands of business or affairs; urgency; as, a press of engagements.
Prest (n.) A duty in money formerly paid by the sheriff on his account in the exchequer, or for money left or remaining in his hands.
Prial (n.) A corruption of pair royal. See under Pair, n.
Prian (n.) A fine, white, somewhat friable clay; also, the ore contained in a mixture of clay and pebbles.
Price (n. & v.) The sum or amount of money at which a thing is valued, or the value which a seller sets on his goods in market; that for which something is bought or sold, or offered for sale; equivalent in money or other means of exchange; current value or rate paid or demanded in market or in barter; cost. 2.  v.) Reward; recompense; as, the price of industry.
Prick (n.) To pierce slightly with a sharp-pointed instrument or substance; to make a puncture in, or to make by puncturing; to drive a fine point into; as, to prick one with a pin, needle, etc.; to prick a card; to prick holes in paper. 2. To fix by the point; to attach or hang by puncturing; as, to prick a knife into a board. 3. To mark the outline of by puncturing; to trace or form by pricking; to mark by punctured dots; as, to prick a pattern for embroidery; to prick the notes of a musical composition. 4. To ride or guide with spurs; to spur; to goad; to incite; to urge on; -- sometimes with on, or off. 5. To affect with sharp pain; to sting, as with remorse. 6. To make sharp; to erect into a point; to raise, as something pointed; -- said especially of the ears of an animal, as a horse or dog; and usually followed by up; -- hence, to prick up the ears, to listen sharply; to have the attention and interest strongly engaged. 7. To run a middle seam through, as the cloth of a sail. 8. To trace on a chart, as a ship's course. 9. To drive a nail into (a horse's foot), so as to cause lameness.
Pride (n.) A small European lamprey (Petromyzon branchialis); -- called also prid, and sandpiper. 2. The quality or state of being proud; inordinate self-esteem; an unreasonable conceit of one's own superiority in talents, beauty, wealth, rank, etc., which manifests itself in lofty airs, distance, reserve, and often in contempt of others. 3. A sense of one's own worth, and abhorrence of what is beneath or unworthy of one; lofty self-respect; noble self-esteem; elevation of character; dignified bearing; proud delight; -- in a good sense. 4. That of which one is proud; that which excites boasting or self-gratulation; the occasion or ground of self-esteem, or of arrogant and presumptuous confidence, as beauty, ornament, noble character, children, etc. 5. Highest pitch; elevation reached; loftiness; prime; glory; as, to be in the pride of one's life. 6. Consciousness of power; fullness of animal spirits; mettle; wantonness; hence, lust; sexual desire; esp., an excitement of sexual appetite in a female beast.
Prier (n.) One who pries; one who inquires narrowly and searches, or is inquisitive.
Prime (n.) The first part; the earliest stage; the beginning or opening, as of the day, the year, etc.; hence, the dawn; the spring. 2. The spring of life; youth; hence, full health, strength, or beauty; perfection.
Print (n.) A mark made by impression; a line, character, figure, or indentation, made by the pressure of one thing on another; as, the print of teeth or nails in flesh; the print of the foot in sand or snow. 2. A stamp or die for molding or impressing an ornamental design upon an object; as, a butter print. 3. That which receives an impression, as from a stamp or mold; as, a print of butter. 4. Printed letters; the impression taken from type, as to excellence, form, size, etc.; as, small print; large print; this line is in print. 5. An impression taken from anything, as from an engraved plate. 6. A printed publication, more especially a newspaper or other periodical. 7. A printed cloth; a fabric figured by stamping, especially calico or cotton cloth. 8. A photographic copy, or positive picture, on prepared paper, as from a negative, or from a drawing on transparent paper.
Prise (n. & v.) See Prize, n., 5. Also Prize, v. t.
Prism (n.) A solid whose bases or ends are any similar, equal, and parallel plane figures, and whose sides are parallelograms. 2. A transparent body, with usually three rectangular plane faces or sides, and two equal and parallel triangular ends or bases; -- used in experiments on refraction, dispersion, etc. 3. A form the planes of which are parallel to the vertical axis. See Form, n., 13.
Privy (n.) A partaker; a person having an interest in any action or thing; one who has an interest in an estate created by another; a person having an interest derived from a contract or conveyance to which he is not himself a party. The term, in its proper sense, is distinguished from party.
Prize (n.) That which is taken from another; something captured; a thing seized by force, stratagem, or superior power. 2. Anything captured by a belligerent using the rights of war; esp., property captured at sea in virtue of the rights of war, as a vessel. 3. An honor or reward striven for in a competitive contest; anything offered to be competed for, or as an inducement to, or reward of, effort. 4. That which may be won by chance, as in a lottery. 5. A lever; a pry; also, the hold of a lever.
Probe (n.) An instrument for examining the depth or other circumstances of a wound, ulcer, or cavity, or the direction of a sinus, of for exploring for bullets, for stones in the bladder, etc.
Prodd (n.) A crossbow. See Prod, 3.
Prong (n.) The tine of a fork, or of a similar instrument; as, a fork of two or three prongs. 2. A sharp projection, as of an antler.
Proof (n.) Any effort, process, or operation designed to establish or discover a fact or truth; an act of testing; a test; a trial. 2. That degree of evidence which convinces the mind of any truth or fact, and produces belief; a test by facts or arguments that induce, or tend to induce, certainty of the judgment; conclusive evidence; demonstration. 3. The quality or state of having been proved or tried; firmness or hardness that resists impression, or does not yield to force; impenetrability of physical bodies. 4. A trial impression, as from type, taken for correction or examination; -- called also proof sheet. 5. A process for testing the accuracy of an operation performed. Cf. Prove, v. t., 5.
Props (n. pl.) A game of chance, in which four sea shells, each called a prop, are used instead of dice.
Prose (n.) The ordinary language of men in speaking or writing; language not cast in poetical measure or rhythm; -- contradistinguished from verse, or metrical composition. 2. Hence, language which evinces little imagination or animation; dull and commonplace discourse. 3. A hymn with no regular meter, sometimes introduced into the Mass. See Sequence.
Proxy (n.) The agency for another who acts through the agent; authority to act for another, esp. to vote in a legislative or corporate capacity. 2. A writing by which one person authorizes another to vote in his stead, as in a corporation meeting.
Prune (n.) A plum; esp., a dried plum, used in cookery; as, French or Turkish prunes; California prunes.
Psalm (n.) Especially, one of the hymns by David and others, collected into one book of the Old Testament, or a modern metrical version of such a hymn for public worship.
Psoas (n.) An internal muscle arising from the lumbar vertebrae and inserted into the femur. In man there are usually two on each side, and the larger one, or great psoas, forms a part of the iliopsoas.
Psora (n.) A cutaneous disease; especially, the itch.
Pubes (n.) Hence (as more commonly used), the lower part of the hypogastric region; the pubic region.
Puker (n.) One who pukes, vomits.
Pulas (n.) The East Indian leguminous tree Butea frondosa. See Gum Butea, under Gum.
Pulpy (n.) Like pulp; consisting of pulp; soft; fleshy; succulent; as, the pulpy covering of a nut; the pulpy substance of a peach or a cherry.
Pulse (n.) Leguminous plants, or their seeds, as beans, pease, etc. 2. The beating or throbbing of the heart or blood vessels, especially of the arteries. 3. Any measured or regular beat; any short, quick motion, regularly repeated, as of a medium in the transmission of light, sound, etc.; oscillation; vibration; pulsation; impulse; beat; movement.
Punch (n.) A beverage composed of wine or distilled liquor, water (or milk), sugar, and the juice of lemon, with spice or mint; -- specifically named from the kind of spirit used; as rum punch, claret punch, champagne punch, etc. 2. A short, fat fellow; anything short and thick. 3. One of a breed of large, heavy draught horses; as, the Suffolk punch. 4. A tool, usually of steel, variously shaped at one end for different uses, and either solid, for stamping or for perforating holes in metallic plates and other substances, or hollow and sharpedged, for cutting out blanks, as for buttons, steel pens, jewelry, and the like; a die. 5. A prop, as for the roof of a mine. 6. To perforate or stamp with an instrument by pressure, or a blow; as, to punch a hole; to punch ticket.
Pungy (n.) A small sloop or shallop, or a large boat with sails.
Punka (n.) A machine for fanning a room, usually a movable fanlike frame covered with canvas, and suspended from the ceiling. It is kept in motion by pulling a cord.
Pupil (n.) The aperture in the iris; the sight, apple, or black of the eye. See the Note under Eye, and Iris. 2. A boy or a girl under the age of puberty, that is, under fourteen if a male, and under twelve if a female.
Puppy (n.) The young of a canine animal, esp. of the common dog; a whelp.
Puree (n.) A dish made by boiling any article of food to a pulp and rubbing it through a sieve; as, a puree of fish, or of potatoes; especially, a soup the thickening of which is so treated.
Purim (n.) A Jewish festival, called also the Feast of Lots, instituted to commemorate the deliverance of the Jews from the machinations of Haman.
Purse (n.) A small bag or pouch, the opening of which is made to draw together closely, used to carry money in; by extension, any receptacle for money carried on the person; a wallet; a pocketbook; a portemonnaie. 2. Hence, a treasury; finances; as, the public purse. 3. A sum of money offered as a prize, or collected as a present; as, to win the purse; to make up a purse. 4. In Turkey, the sum of 500 piasters. 5. In Persia, the sum of 50 tomans.
Pussy (n.) A pet name for a cat; also, an endearing name for a girl.
Putty (n.) A kind of thick paste or cement compounded of whiting, or soft carbonate of lime, and linseed oil, when applied beaten or kneaded to the consistence of dough, -- used in fastening glass in sashes, stopping crevices, and for similar purposes.
Pygmy (n.) One of a fabulous race of dwarfs who waged war with the cranes, and were destroyed. 2. Hence, a short, insignificant person; a dwarf.
Pylon (n.) A low tower, having a truncated pyramidal form, and flanking an ancient Egyptian gateway.
Pyrus (n.) A genus of rosaceous trees and shrubs having pomes for fruit. It includes the apple, crab apple, pear, chokeberry, sorb, and mountain ash.
Pyxis (n.) The acetabulum. See Acetabulum, 2.
Quack (n.) The cry of the duck, or a sound in imitation of it; a hoarse, quacking noise. 2. Hence, one who boastfully pretends to skill or knowledge of any kind not possessed; a charlatan.
Quail (n.) Any gallinaceous bird belonging to Coturnix and several allied genera of the Old World, especially the common European quail (C. communis), the rain quail (C. Coromandelica) of India, the stubble quail (C. pectoralis), and the Australian swamp quail (Synoicus australis). 2. Any one of several American partridges belonging to Colinus, Callipepla, and allied genera, especially the bobwhite (called Virginia quail, and Maryland quail), and the California quail (Calipepla Californica). 3. Any one of numerous species of Turnix and allied genera, native of the Old World, as the Australian painted quail (Turnix varius). See Turnix.
Qualm (n.) A sudden attack of illness, faintness, or pain; an agony. 2. Especially, a sudden sensation of nausea.
Quarl (n.) A medusa, or jellyfish.
Quart (n.) The fourth part; a quarter; hence, a region of the earth. 2. A measure of capacity, both in dry and in liquid measure; the fourth part of a gallon; the eighth part of a peck; two pints. 3. In cards, four successive cards of the same suit. Cf. Tierce, 4.
Quass (n.) A thin, sour beer, made by pouring warm water on rye or barley meal and letting it ferment, -- much used by the Russians.
Queen (n.) A woman who is the sovereign of a kingdom; a female monarch; as, Elizabeth, queen of England; Mary, queen of Scots. 2. A woman eminent in power or attractions; the highest of her kind; as, a queen in society; -- also used figuratively of cities, countries, etc. 3. The fertile, or fully developed, female of social bees, ants, and termites. 4. The most powerful, and except the king the most important, piece in a set of chessmen. 5. A playing card bearing the picture of a queen; as, the queen of spades. 6. A male homosexual, esp. one who is effeminate or dresses in women's clothing.
Querl (n.) A coil; a twirl; as, the qwerl of hair on the fore leg of a blooded horse.
Quern (n.) A mill for grinding grain, the upper stone of which was turned by hand; -- used before the invention of windmills and watermills.
Query (n.) A question in the mind; a doubt; as, I have a query about his sincerity.
Quest (n.) The act of seeking, or looking after anything; attempt to find or obtain; search; pursuit; as, to rove in quest of game, of a lost child, of property, etc. 2. Those who make search or inquiry, taken collectively.
Quica (n.) A small South American opossum (Didelphys quica), native of Guiana and Brazil. It feeds upon insects, small birds, and fruit.
Quick (n.) That which is quick, or alive; a living animal or plant; especially, the hawthorn, or other plants used in making a living hedge. 2. The life; the mortal point; a vital part; a part susceptible of serious injury or keen feeling; the sensitive living flesh; the part of a finger or toe to which the nail is attached; the tender emotions; as, to cut a finger nail to the quick; to thrust a sword to the quick, to taunt one to the quick; -- used figuratively.
Quill (n.) One of the large feathers of a bird's wing, or one of the rectrices of the tail; also, the stock of such a feather. 2. A pen for writing made by sharpening and splitting the point or nib of the stock of a feather; as, history is the proper subject of his quill. 3. A spindle, or spool, as of reed or wood, upon which the thread for the woof is wound in a shuttle.
Quilt (n.) Anything that is quilted; esp., a quilted bed cover, or a skirt worn by women; any cover or garment made by putting wool, cotton, etc., between two cloths and stitching them together; also, any outer bed cover.
Quint (n.) A set or sequence of five, as in piquet.
Quipu (n.) A contrivance employed by the ancient Peruvians, Mexicans, etc., as a substitute for writing and figures, consisting of a main cord, from which hung at certain distances smaller cords of various colors, each having a special meaning, as silver, gold, corn, soldiers. etc. Single, double, and triple knots were tied in the smaller cords, representing definite numbers. It was chiefly used for arithmetical purposes, and to register important facts and events.
Quire (n.) A collection of twenty-four sheets of paper of the same size and quality, unfolded or having a single fold; one twentieth of a ream.
Quirk (n.) A sudden turn; a starting from the point or line; hence, an artful evasion or subterfuge; a shift; a quibble; as, the quirks of a pettifogger. 2. An irregular air; as, light quirks of music. 3. A piece of ground taken out of any regular ground plot or floor, so as to make a court, yard, etc.; -- sometimes written quink. 4. A small channel, deeply recessed in proportion to its width, used to insulate and give relief to a convex rounded molding.
Quoin (n.) Originally, a solid exterior angle, as of a building; now, commonly, one of the selected pieces of material by which the corner is marked. 2. A wedgelike piece of stone, wood metal, or other material, used for various purposes
Quoit (n.) A flattened ring-shaped piece of iron, to be pitched at a fixed object in play; hence, any heavy flat missile used for the same purpose, as a stone, piece of iron, etc.
Quoll (n.) A marsupial of Australia (Dasyurus macrurus), about the size of a cat.
Rabid (n.) Extreme, unreasonable, or fanatical in opinion; excessively zealous; as, a rabid socialist. 2. Affected with the distemper called rabies; mad; as, a rabid dog or fox. 3. Of or pertaining to rabies, or hydrophobia; as, rabid virus.
Racer (n.) One who, or that which, races, or contends in a race; esp., a race horse.
Rache (n.) A dog that pursued his prey by scent, as distinguished from the greyhound.
Radix (n.) A primitive word, from which spring other words; a radical; a root; an etymon. 2. A number or quantity which is arbitrarily made the fundamental number of any system; a base. Thus, 10 is the radix, or base, of the common system of logarithms, and also of the decimal system of numeration. 3. A finite expression, from which a series is derived.
Raiae (n. pl.) The order of elasmobranch fishes which includes the sawfishes, skates, and rays; -- called also Rajae, and Rajii.
Raker (n.) One who, or that which, rakes 2. See Gill rakers, under 1st Gill.
Ramie (n.) The grass-cloth plant (B/hmeria nivea); also, its fiber, which is very fine and exceedingly strong; -- called also China grass, and rhea. See Grass-cloth plant, under Grass.
Ranch (n.) A tract of land used for grazing and the rearing of horses, cattle, or sheep. See Rancho, 2.
Range (n.) To set in a row, or in rows; to place in a regular line or lines, or in ranks; to dispose in the proper order; to rank; as, to range soldiers in line. 2. To place (as a single individual) among others in a line, row, or order, as in the ranks of an army; -- usually, reflexively and figuratively, (in the sense) to espouse a cause, to join a party, etc. 3. To dispose in a classified or in systematic order; to arrange regularly; as, to range plants and animals in genera and species. 4. To rove over or through; as, to range the fields. 5. To sail or pass in a direction parallel to or near; as, to range the coast. 6. To be native to, or to live in; to frequent.
Raphe (n.) A line, ridge, furrow, or band of fibers, especially in the median line; as, the raphe of the tongue.
Rasse (n.) A carnivore (Viverricula Mallaccensis) allied to the civet but smaller, native of China and the East Indies. It furnishes a perfume resembling that of the civet, which is highly prized by the Javanese. Called also Malacca weasel, and lesser civet.
Ratch (n.) A ratchet wheel, or notched bar, with which a pawl or click works.
Ratel (n.) Any carnivore of the genus Mellivora, allied to the weasels and the skunks; -- called also honey badger.
Ratio (n.) The relation which one quantity or magnitude has to another of the same kind. It is expressed by the quotient of the division of the first by the second; thus, the ratio of 3 to 6 is expressed by / or /; of a to b by a/b; or (less commonly) the second term is made the dividend; as, a:b = b/a. 2. Hence, fixed relation of number, quantity, or degree; rate; proportion; as, the ratio of representation in Congress.
Raven (n.) A large black passerine bird (Corvus corax), similar to the crow, but larger. It is native of the northern parts of Europe, Asia, and America, and is noted for its sagacity.
Rayah (n.) A person not a Mohammedan, who pays the capitation tax.
Reach (n.) The act of stretching or extending; extension; power of reaching or touching with the person, or a limb, or something held or thrown; as, the fruit is beyond my reach; to be within reach of cannon shot. 2. The power of stretching out or extending action, influence, or the like; power of attainment or management; extent of force or capacity. 3. Extent; stretch; expanse; hence, application; influence; result; scope. 4. An extended portion of land or water; a stretch; a straight portion of a stream or river, as from one turn to another; a level stretch, as between locks in a canal; an arm of the sea extending up into the land.
Ready (n.) Ready money; cash; -- commonly with the; as, he was well supplied with the ready.
Realm (n.) Hence, in general, province; region; country; domain; department; division; as, the realm of fancy.
Rebec (n.) An instrument formerly used which somewhat resembled the violin, having three strings, and being played with a bow.
Rebus (n.) A mode of expressing words and phrases by pictures of objects whose names resemble those words, or the syllables of which they are composed; enigmatical representation of words by figures; hence, a peculiar form of riddle made up of such representations. 2. A pictorial suggestion on a coat of arms of the name of the person to whom it belongs. See Canting arms, under Canting.
Redan (n.) A step or vertical offset in a wall on uneven ground, to keep the parts level.
Redia (n.) A kind of larva, or nurse, which is prroduced within the sporocyst of certain trematodes by asexual generation. It in turn produces, in the same way, either another generation of rediae, or else cercariae within its own body. Called also proscolex, and nurse. See Illustration in Appendix.
Reeve (n.) an officer, steward, bailiff, or governor; -- used chiefly in compounds; as, shirereeve, now written sheriff; portreeve, etc.
Regal (n.) A small portable organ, played with one hand, the bellows being worked with the other, -- used in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
Regma (n.) A kind of dry fruit, consisting of three or more cells, each which at length breaks open at the inner angle.
Reign (n.) The time during which a king, queen, or emperor possesses the supreme authority; as, it happened in the reign of Elizabeth. 2. To possess or exercise sovereign power or authority; to exercise government, as a king or emperor;; to hold supreme power; to rule. 3. Hence, to be predominant; to prevail.
Reins (n. pl.) The kidneys; also, the region of the kidneys; the loins.
Relax (n.) To make lax or loose; to make less close, firm, rigid, tense, or the like; to slacken; to loosen; to open; as, to relax a rope or cord; to relax the muscles or sinews. 2. To make less severe or rigorous; to abate the stringency of; to remit in respect to strenuousness, earnestness, or effort; as, to relax discipline; to relax one's attention or endeavors. 3. Hence, to relieve from attention or effort; to ease; to recreate; to divert; as, amusement relaxes the mind. 4. To relieve from constipation; to loosen; to open; as, an aperient relaxes the bowels.
Relay (n.) A supply of anything arranged beforehand for affording relief from time to time, or at successive stages; provision for successive relief. 2. A supply of horses placced at stations to be in readiness to relieve others, so that a trveler may proceed without delay. 3. A supply of hunting dogs or horses kept in readiness at certain places to relive the tired dogs or horses, and to continue the pursuit of the game if it comes that way. 4. In various forms of telegraphic apparatus, a magnet which receives the circuit current, and is caused by it to bring into into action the power of a local battery for performing the work of making the record; also, a similar device by which the current in one circuit is made to open or close another circuit in which a current is passing.
Relic (n.) The body from which the soul has departed; a corpse; especially, the body, or some part of the body, of a deceased saint or martyr; -- usually in the plural when referring to the whole body. 2. Hence, a memorial; anything preserved in remembrance; as, relics of youthful days or friendships.
Rente (n.) In France, interest payable by government on indebtedness; the bonds, shares, stocks, etc., which represent government indebtedness.
Reset (n.) The receiving of stolen goods, or harboring an outlaw.
Resin (n.) Any one of a class of yellowish brown solid inflammable substances, of vegetable origin, which are nonconductors of electricity, have a vitreous fracture, and are soluble in ether, alcohol, and essential oils, but not in water; specif., pine resin (see Rosin).
Rheum (n.) A serous or mucous discharge, especially one from the eves or nose.
Rhino (n.) Gold and silver, or money.
Rhomb (n.) An equilateral parallelogram, or quadrilateral figure whose sides are equal and the opposite sides parallel. The angles may be unequal, two being obtuse and two acute, as in the cut, or the angles may be equal, in which case it is usually called a square.
Rhumb (n.) A line which crosses successive meridians at a constant angle; -- called also rhumb line, and loxodromic curve. See Loxodromic.
Rhyme (n.) An expression of thought in numbers, measure, or verse; a composition in verse; a rhymed tale; poetry; harmony of language. 2. Correspondence of sound in the terminating words or syllables of two or more verses, one succeeding another immediately or at no great distance. The words or syllables so used must not begin with the same consonant, or if one begins with a vowel the other must begin with a consonant. The vowel sounds and accents must be the same, as also the sounds of the final consonants if there be any. 3. Verses, usually two, having this correspondence with each other; a couplet; a poem containing rhymes. 4. To make rhymes, or verses.
Rider (n.) One who, or that which, rides. 2. Formerly, an agent who went out with samples of goods to obtain orders; a commercial traveler. 3. An addition or amendment to a manuscript or other document, which is attached on a separate piece of paper; in legislative practice, an additional clause annexed to a bill while in course of passage; something extra or burdensome that is imposed. 4. Rock material in a vein of ore, dividing it. 5. An interior rib occasionally fixed in a ship's hold, reaching from the keelson to the beams of the lower deck, to strengthen her frame. 6. A small forked weight which straddles the beam of a balance, along which it can be moved in the manner of the weight on a steelyard.
Ridge (n.) The back, or top of the back; a crest. 2. A range of hills or mountains, or the upper part of such a range; any extended elevation between valleys. 3. A raised line or strip, as of ground thrown up by a plow or left between furrows or ditches, or as on the surface of metal, cloth, or bone, etc. 4. The intersection of two surface forming a salient angle, especially the angle at the top between the opposite slopes or sides of a roof or a vault.
Rifle (n.) A gun, the inside of whose barrel is grooved with spiral channels, thus giving the ball a rotary motion and insuring greater accuracy of fire. As a military firearm it has superseded the musket. 2. A strip of wood covered with emery or a similar material, used for sharpening scythes.
Rigol (n.) A circle; hence, a diadem.
Rigor (n.) A sense of chilliness, with contraction of the skin; a convulsive shuddering or tremor, as in the chill preceding a fever. 2. See 1st Rigor, 2. 3. Severity of climate or season; inclemency; as, the rigor of the storm; the rigors of winter. 4. Exactness without allowance, deviation, or indulgence; strictness; as, the rigor of criticism; to execute a law with rigor; to enforce moral duties with rigor; -- opposed to lenity. 5. Severity of life; austerity; voluntary submission to pain, abstinence, or mortification.
Rille (n.) One of certain narrow, crooked valleys seen, by aid of the telescope, on the surface of the moon.
Riser (n.) One who rises; as, an early riser. 2. The upright piece of a step, from tread to tread. 3. Any small upright face, as of a seat, platform, veranda, or the like. 4. A feed head. See under Feed, n.
Rival (n.) One who is in pursuit of the same object as another; one striving to reach or obtain something which another is attempting to obtain, and which one only can posses; a competitor; as, rivals in love; rivals for a crown.
River (n.) A large stream of water flowing in a bed or channel and emptying into the ocean, a sea, a lake, or another stream; a stream larger than a rivulet or brook. 2. Fig.: A large stream; copious flow; abundance; as, rivers of blood; rivers of oil.
Rivet (n.) A metallic pin with a head, used for uniting two plates or pieces of material together, by passing it through them and then beating or pressing down the point so that it shall spread out and form a second head; a pin or bolt headed or clinched at both ends.
Roach (n.) A European fresh-water fish of the Carp family (Leuciscus rutilus). It is silver-white, with a greenish back. 2. The redfin, or shiner. 3. A convex curve or arch cut in the edge of a sail to prevent chafing, or to secure a better fit.
Roast (n.) That which is roasted; a piece of meat which has been roasted, or is suitable for being roasted.
Robin (n.) A small European singing bird (Erythacus rubecula), having a reddish breast; -- called also robin redbreast, robinet, and ruddock. 2. An American singing bird (Merula migratoria), having the breast chestnut, or dull red. The upper parts are olive-gray, the head and tail blackish. Called also robin redbreast, and migratory thrush. 3. Any one of several species of Australian warblers of the genera Petroica, Melanadrays, and allied genera; as, the scarlet-breasted robin (Petroica mullticolor). 4. Any one of several Asiatic birds; as, the Indian robins. See Indian robin, below.
Rocoa (n.) The orange-colored pulp covering the seeds of the tropical plant Bixa Orellana, from which annotto is prepared. See Annoto.
Rogue (n.) A vagrant; an idle, sturdy beggar; a vagabond; a tramp. 2. One who is pleasantly mischievous or frolicsome; hence, often used as a term of endearment. 3. An elephant that has separated from a herd and roams about alone, in which state it is very savage.
Rokee (n.) Parched Indian corn, pounded up and mixed with sugar; -- called also yokeage.
Roman (n.) A native, or permanent resident, of Rome; a citizen of Rome, or one upon whom certain rights and privileges of a Roman citizen were conferred. 2. Roman type, letters, or print, collectively; -- in distinction from Italics.
Romic (n.) A method of notation for all spoken sounds, proposed by Mr. Sweet; -- so called because it is based on the common Roman-letter alphabet. It is like the palaeotype of Mr. Ellis in the general plan, but simpler.
Ronco (n.) See Croaker, n., 2. (a).
Ronde (n.) A kind of script in which the heavy strokes are nearly upright, giving the characters when taken together a round look.
Rondo (n.) A composition, vocal or instrumental, commonly of a lively, cheerful character, in which the first strain recurs after each of the other strains. 2. See Rondeau, 1.
Rosin (n.) The hard, amber-colored resin left after distilling off the volatile oil of turpentine; colophony.
Rouge (n.) A red amorphous powder consisting of ferric oxide. It is used in polishing glass, metal, or gems, and as a cosmetic, etc. Called also crocus, jeweler's rouge, etc. 2. A cosmetic used for giving a red color to the cheeks or lips. The best is prepared from the dried flowers of the safflower, but it is often made from carmine.
Rough (n.) Having inequalities, small ridges, or points, on the surface; not smooth or plain; as, a rough board; a rough stone; rough cloth. 2. Not level; having a broken surface; uneven; -- said of a piece of land, or of a road. 3. Not polished; uncut; -- said of a gem; as, a rough diamond. 4. Marked by coarseness; shaggy; ragged; disordered; -- said of dress, appearance, or the like; as, a rough coat. 5. Hence, figuratively, lacking refinement, gentleness, or polish. 6. Not courteous or kind; harsh; rude; uncivil; as, a rough temper. 7. Marked by severity or violence; harsh; hard; as, rough measures or actions. 8. Loud and hoarse; offensive to the ear; harsh; grating; -- said of sound, voice, and the like; as, a rough tone; rough numbers. 9. Austere; harsh to the taste; as, rough wine. 10. Tempestuous; boisterous; stormy; as, rough weather; a rough day. 11. Hastily or carelessly done; wanting finish; incomplete; as, a rough estimate; a rough draught.
Round (n.) Anything round, as a circle, a globe, a ring. ""The golden round"" [the crown]. 2. A series of changes or events ending where it began; a series of like events recurring in continuance; a cycle; a periodical revolution; as, the round of the seasons; a round of pleasures. 3. A course of action or conduct performed by a number of persons in turn, or one after another, as if seated in a circle. 4. A series of duties or tasks which must be performed in turn, and then repeated. 5. That which goes round a whole circle or company; as, a round of applause. 6. Rotation, as in office; succession. 7. The step of a ladder; a rundle or rung; also, a crosspiece which joins and braces the legs of a chair. 8. A course ending where it began; a circuit; a beat; especially, one freguently or regulary traversed; also, the act of traversing a circuit; as, a watchman's round; the rounds of the postman. 9. A walk performed by a guard or an officer round the rampart of a garrison, or among sentinels, to see that the sentinels are faithful and all things safe; also, the guard or officer, with his attendants, who performs this duty; -- usually in the plural. 10. Ammunition for discharging a piece or pieces once; as, twenty rounds of ammunition were given out. 11. A short vocal piece, resembling a catch in which three or four voices follow each other round in a species of canon in the unison. 12. The time during which prize fighters or boxers are in actual contest without an intermission, as prescribed by their rules; a bout. 13. A brewer's vessel in which the fermentation is concluded, the yeast escaping through the bunghole. 14. A vessel filled, as for drinking. 15. An assembly; a group; a circle; as, a round of politicians. 16. Same as Round of beef, below.
Roust (n.) A strong tide or current, especially in a narrow channel.
Route (n.) The course or way which is traveled or passed, or is to be passed; a passing; a course; a road or path; a march.
Rowdy (n.) One who engages in rows, or noisy quarrels; a ruffianly fellow.
Rowel (n.) The little wheel of a spur, with sharp points. 2. A roll of hair, silk, etc., passed through the flesh of horses, answering to a seton in human surgery.
Rowen (n.) A stubble field left unplowed till late in the autumn, that it may be cropped by cattle.
Royal (n.) Printing and writing papers of particular sizes. See under paper, n. 2. One of the upper or distal branches of an antler, as the third and fourth tynes of the antlers of a stag. 3. One of the soldiers of the first regiment of foot of the British army, formerly called the Royals, and supposed to be the oldest regular corps in Europe; -- now called the Royal Scots.
Ruble (n.) The unit of monetary value in Russia. It is divided into 100 copecks, and in the gold coin of the realm (as in the five and ten ruble pieces) is worth about 77 cents. The silver ruble is a coin worth about 60 cents.
Rubus (n.) A genus of rosaceous plants, including the raspberry and blackberry.
Ruche (n.) A plaited, quilled, or goffered strip of lace, net, ribbon, or other material, -- used in place of collars or cuffs, and as a trimming for women's dresses and bonnets. 2. A pile of arched tiles, used to catch and retain oyster spawn.
Ruddy (n.) Of a red color; red, or reddish; as, a ruddy sky; a ruddy flame. 2. Of a lively flesh color, or the color of the human skin in high health; as, ruddy cheeks or lips.
Ruffe (n.) A small freshwater European perch (Acerina vulgaris); -- called also pope, blacktail, and stone, / striped, perch.
Rufol (n.) A phenol derivative of anthracene obtained as a white crystalline substance, which on oxidation produces a red dyestuff related to anthraquinone.
Ruler (n.) A straight or curved strip of wood, metal, etc., with a smooth edge, used for guiding a pen or pencil in drawing lines. Cf. Rule, n., 7 (a).
Rumor (n.) A flying or popular report; the common talk; hence, public fame; notoriety. 2. A current story passing from one person to another, without any known authority for its truth; -- in this sense often personified. 3. A prolonged, indistinct noise.
Runer (n.) A bard, or learned man, among the ancient Goths.
Rupee (n.) A silver coin, and money of account, in the East Indies.
Rupia (n.) An eruption upon the skin, consisting of vesicles with inflamed base and filled with serous, purulent, or bloody fluid, which dries up, forming a blackish crust.
Rusma (n.) A depilatory made of orpiment and quicklime, and used by the Turks. See Rhusma.
Rutin (n.) A glucoside resembling, but distinct from, quercitrin. Rutin is found in the leaves of the rue (Ruta graveolens) and other plants, and obtained as a bitter yellow crystalline substance which yields quercitin on decomposition.
Ryder (n.) A gold coin of Zealand [Netherlands] equal to 14 florins, about $ 5.60.
Sabre (n.) A sword with a broad and heavy blade, thick at the back, and usually more or less curved like a scimiter; a cavalry sword.
Sable (n.) A carnivorous animal of the Weasel family (Mustela zibellina) native of the northern latitudes of Europe, Asia, and America, -- noted for its fine, soft, and valuable fur.
Sabot (n.) A kind of wooden shoe worn by the peasantry in France, Belgium, Sweden, and some other European countries. 2. A thick, circular disk of wood, to which the cartridge bag and projectile are attached, in fixed ammunition for cannon; also, a piece of soft metal attached to a projectile to take the groove of the rifling.
Sadda (n.) A work in the Persian tongue, being a summary of the Zend-Avesta, or sacred books.
Saiga (n.) An antelope (Saiga Tartarica) native of the plains of Siberia and Eastern Russia. The male has erect annulated horns, and tufts of long hair beneath the eyes and ears.
Saint (n.) A person sanctified; a holy or godly person; one eminent for piety and virtue; any true Christian, as being redeemed and consecrated to God.
Saker (n.) A falcon (Falco sacer) native of Southern Europe and Asia, closely resembling the lanner.
Sakti (n.) The divine energy, personified as the wife of a deity (Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, etc.); the female principle.
Salad (n.) A preparation of vegetables, as lettuce, celery, water cress, onions, etc., usually dressed with salt, vinegar, oil, and spice, and eaten for giving a relish to other food; as, lettuce salad; tomato salad, etc. 2. A dish composed of chopped meat or fish, esp. chicken or lobster, mixed with lettuce or other vegetables, and seasoned with oil, vinegar, mustard, and other condiments; as, chicken salad; lobster salad.
Salam (n.) A salutation or compliment of ceremony in the east by word or act; an obeisance, performed by bowing very low and placing the right palm on the forehead.
Salep (n.) The dried tubers of various species of Orchis, and Eulophia. It is used to make a nutritious beverage by treating the powdered preparation with hot water.
Salix (n.) A genus of trees or shrubs including the willow, osier, and the like, growing usually in wet grounds.
Salon (n.) An apartment for the reception of company; hence, in the plural, fashionable parties; circles of fashionable society.
Salpa (n.) A genus of transparent, tubular, free-swimming oceanic tunicates found abundantly in all the warmer latitudes. See Illustration in Appendix.
Salse (n.) A mud volcano, the water of which is often impregnated with salts, whence the name.
Salve (n.) To heal by applications or medicaments; to cure by remedial treatment; to apply salve to; as, to salve a wound. 2. To heal; to remedy; to cure; to make good; to soothe, as with an ointment, especially by some device, trick, or quibble; to gloss over.
Salvo (n.) A concentrated fire from pieces of artillery, as in endeavoring to make a break in a fortification; a volley. 2. A salute paid by a simultaneous, or nearly simultaneous, firing of a number of cannon.
Sambo (n.) A colloquial or humorous appellation for a negro; sometimes, the offspring of a black person and a mulatto; a zambo.
Sangu (n.) The Abyssinian ox (Bos / Bibos, Africanus), noted for the great length of its horns. It has a hump on its back.
Saree (n.) The principal garment of a Hindoo woman. It consists of a long piece of cloth, which is wrapped round the middle of the body, a portion being arranged to hang down in front, and the remainder passed across the bosom over the left shoulder.
Sargo (n.) Any one of several species of sparoid fishes belonging to Sargus, Pomadasys, and related genera; -- called also sar, and saragu.
Saros (n.) A Chaldean astronomical period or cycle, the length of which has been variously estimated from 3,600 years to 3,600 days, or a little short of 10 years.
Sarpo (n.) A large toadfish of the Southern United States and the Gulf of Mexico (Batrachus tau, var. pardus).
Sasin (n.) The Indian antelope (Antilope bezoartica, / cervicapra), noted for its beauty and swiftness. It has long, spiral, divergent horns.
Sasse (n.) A sluice or lock, as in a river, to make it more navigable.
Satan (n.) The grand adversary of man; the Devil, or Prince of darkness; the chief of the fallen angels; the archfiend.
Satin (n.) A silk cloth, of a thick, close texture, and overshot woof, which has a glossy surface.
Satyr (n.) A sylvan deity or demigod, represented as part man and part goat, and characterized by riotous merriment and lasciviousness. 2. Any one of many species of butterflies belonging to the family Nymphalidae. Their colors are commonly brown and gray, often with ocelli on the wings. Called also meadow browns.
Sauce (n.) A composition of condiments and appetizing ingredients eaten with food as a relish; especially, a dressing for meat or fish or for puddings; as, mint sauce; sweet sauce, etc. 2. Stewed or preserved fruit eaten with other food as a relish; as, apple sauce, cranberry sauce, etc.
Sault (n.) A rapid in some rivers; as, the Sault Ste. Marie.
Saury (n.) A slender marine fish (Scomberesox saurus) of Europe and America. It has long, thin, beaklike jaws. Called also billfish, gowdnook, gawnook, skipper, skipjack, skopster, lizard fish, and Egypt herring.
Savoy (n.) A variety of the common cabbage (Brassica oleracea major), having curled leaves, -- much cultivated for winter use.
Saxon (n.) One of a nation or people who formerly dwelt in the northern part of Germany, and who, with other Teutonic tribes, invaded and conquered England in the fifth and sixth centuries.
Scald (n.) A burn, or injury to the skin or flesh, by some hot liquid, or by steam. 2. One of the ancient Scandinavian poets and historiographers; a reciter and singer of heroic poems, eulogies, etc., among the Norsemen; more rarely, a bard of any of the ancient Teutonic tribes.
Scale (n.) The dish of a balance; hence, the balance itself; an instrument or machine for weighing; as, to turn the scale; -- chiefly used in the plural when applied to the whole instrument or apparatus for weighing. Also used figuratively. 2. One of the small, thin, membranous, bony or horny pieces which form the covering of many fishes and reptiles, and some mammals, belonging to the dermal part of the skeleton, or dermoskeleton. See Cycloid, Ctenoid, and Ganoid. 3. Hence, any layer or leaf of metal or other material, resembling in size and thinness the scale of a fish; as, a scale of iron, of bone, etc. 4. One of the small scalelike structures covering parts of some invertebrates, as those on the wings of Lepidoptera and on the body of Thysanura; the elytra of certain annelids. See Lepidoptera. 5. A small appendage like a rudimentary leaf, resembling the scales of a fish in form, and often in arrangement; as, the scale of a bud, of a pine cone, and the like. The name is also given to the chaff on the stems of ferns. 6. An incrustation deposit on the inside of a vessel in which water is heated, as a steam boiler. 7. The thin oxide which forms on the surface of iron forgings. It consists essentially of the magnetic oxide, Fe3O4. Also, a similar coating upon other metals. 8. Hence, anything graduated, especially when employed as a measure or rule, or marked by lines at regular intervals. 9. A mathematical instrument, consisting of a slip of wood, ivory, or metal, with one or more sets of spaces graduated and numbered on its surface, for measuring or laying off distances, etc., as in drawing, plotting, and the like. See Gunter's scale. 10. A series of spaces marked by lines, and representing proportionately larger distances; as, a scale of miles, yards, feet, etc., for a map or plan. 11. A basis for a numeral system; as, the decimal scale; the binary scale, etc. 12. The graduated series of all the tones, ascending or descending, from the keynote to its octave; -- called also the gamut. It may be repeated through any number of octaves. See Chromatic scale, Diatonic scale, Major scale, and Minor scale, under Chromatic, Diatonic, Major, and Minor. 13. Gradation; succession of ascending and descending steps and degrees; progressive series; scheme of comparative rank or order; as, a scale of being. 14. Relative dimensions, without difference in proportion of parts; size or degree of the parts or components in any complex thing, compared with other like things; especially, the relative proportion of the linear dimensions of the parts of a drawing, map, model, etc., to the dimensions of the corresponding parts of the object that is represented; as, a map on a scale of an inch to a mile.
Scalp (n.) A part of the skin of the head, with the hair attached, cut or torn off from an enemy by the Indian warriors of North America, as a token of victory.
Scape (n.) A peduncle rising from the ground or from a subterranean stem, as in the stemless violets, the bloodroot, and the like.
Scare (n.) Fright; esp., sudden fright produced by a trifling cause, or originating in mistake.
Scarf (n.) An article of dress of a light and decorative character, worn loosely over the shoulders or about the neck or the waist; a light shawl or handkerchief for the neck; also, a cravat; a neckcloth. 2. In a piece which is to be united to another by a scarf joint, the part of the end or edge that is tapered off, rabbeted, or notched so as to be thinner than the rest of the piece.
Scarp (n.) A band in the same position as the bend sinister, but only half as broad as the latter.
Scate (n.) See Skate, for the foot.
Scena (n.) An accompanied dramatic recitative, interspersed with passages of melody, or followed by a full aria.
Scene (n.) The structure on which a spectacle or play is exhibited; the part of a theater in which the acting is done, with its adjuncts and decorations; the stage. 2. The decorations and fittings of a stage, representing the place in which the action is supposed to go on; one of the slides, or other devices, used to give an appearance of reality to the action of a play; as, to paint scenes; to shift the scenes; to go behind the scenes. 3. So much of a play as passes without change of locality or time, or important change of character; hence, a subdivision of an act; a separate portion of a play, subordinate to the act, but differently determined in different plays; as, an act of four scenes. 4. The place, time, circumstance, etc., in which anything occurs, or in which the action of a story, play, or the like, is laid; surroundings amid which anything is set before the imagination; place of occurrence, exhibition, or action. 5. A landscape, or part of a landscape; scenery. 6. An exhibition of passionate or strong feeling before others; often, an artifical or affected action, or course of action, done for effect; a theatrical display.
Scent (n.) That which, issuing from a body, affects the olfactory organs of animals; odor; smell; as, the scent of an orange, or of a rose; the scent of musk. 2. Specifically, the odor left by an animal on the ground in passing over it; as, dogs find or lose the scent; hence, course of pursuit; track of discovery. 3. The power of smelling; the sense of smell; as, a hound of nice scent; to divert the scent.
Scion (n.) Hence, a descendant; an heir; as, a scion of a royal stock.
Scobs (n. sing. & pl.) Raspings of ivory, hartshorn, metals, or other hard substance.
Scoff (n.) Derision; ridicule; mockery; derisive or mocking expression of scorn, contempt, or reproach. 2. An object of scorn, mockery, or derision.
Scold (n.) One who scolds, or makes a practice of scolding; esp., a rude, clamorous woman; a shrew.
Scone (n.) A cake, thinner than a bannock, made of wheat or barley or oat meal.
Scoop (n.) A large ladle; a vessel with a long handle, used for dipping liquids; a utensil for bailing boats. 2. A deep shovel, or any similar implement for digging out and dipping or shoveling up anything; as, a flour scoop; the scoop of a dredging machine. 3. A spoon-shaped instrument, used in extracting certain substances or foreign bodies. 4. The act of scooping, or taking with a scoop or ladle; a motion with a scoop, as in dipping or shoveling. 5. To take out or up with, a scoop; to lade out. 6. To empty by lading; as, to scoop a well dry. 7. To make hollow, as a scoop or dish; to excavate; to dig out; to form by digging or excavation.
Scope (n.) That at which one aims; the thing or end to which the mind directs its view; that which is purposed to be reached or accomplished; hence, ultimate design, aim, or purpose; intention; drift; object. 2. Room or opportunity for free outlook or aim; space for action; amplitude of opportunity; free course or vent; liberty; range of view, intent, or action. 3. Length; extent; sweep; as, scope of cable.
Score (n.) A notch or incision; especially, one that is made as a tally mark; hence, a mark, or line, made for the purpose of account. 2. An account or reckoning; account of dues; bill; hence, indebtedness. 3. The number twenty, as being marked off by a special score or tally; hence, in pl., a large number. 4. The number of points gained by the contestants, or either of them, in any game, as in cards or cricket. 5. The original and entire draught, or its transcript, of a composition, with the parts for all the different instruments or voices written on staves one above another, so that they can be read at a glance; -- so called from the bar, which, in its early use, was drawn through all the parts. 6. To mark with parallel lines or scratches; as, the rocks of New England and the Western States were scored in the drift epoch.
Scorn (n.) An object of extreme disdain, contempt, or derision.
Scout (n.) A person sent out to gain and bring in tidings; especially, one employed in war to gain information of the movements and condition of an enemy. 2. A college student's or undergraduate's servant; -- so called in Oxford, England; at Cambridge called a gyp; and at Dublin, a skip.
Scowl (n.) The wrinkling of the brows or face in frowing; the expression of displeasure, sullenness, or discontent in the countenance; an angry frown. 2. Hence, gloom; dark or threatening aspect.
Scrag (n.) Something thin, lean, or rough; a bony piece; especially, a bony neckpiece of meat; hence, humorously or in contempt, the neck. 2. A ragged, stunted tree or branch.
Scree (n.) A pebble; a stone; also, a heap of stones or rocky debris.
Screw (n.) A cylinder, or a cylindrical perforation, having a continuous rib, called the thread, winding round it spirally at a constant inclination, so as to leave a continuous spiral groove between one turn and the next, -- used chiefly for producing, when revolved, motion or pressure in the direction of its axis, by the sliding of the threads of the cylinder in the grooves between the threads of the perforation adapted to it, the former being distinguished as the external, or male screw, or, more usually the screw; the latter as the internal, or female screw, or, more usually, the nut. 2. Specifically, a kind of nail with a spiral thread and a head with a nick to receive the end of the screw-driver. Screws are much used to hold together pieces of wood or to fasten something; -- called also wood screws, and screw nails. See also Screw bolt, below. 3. Anything shaped or acting like a screw; esp., a form of wheel for propelling steam vessels. It is placed at the stern, and furnished with blades having helicoidal surfaces to act against the water in the manner of a screw. See Screw propeller, below. 4. An instructor who examines with great or unnecessary severity; also, a searching or strict examination of a student by an instructor. 5. An unsound or worn-out horse, useful as a hack, and commonly of good appearance. 6. A straight line in space with which a definite linear magnitude termed the pitch is associated (cf. 5th Pitch, 10 (b)). It is used to express the displacement of a rigid body, which may always be made to consist of a rotation about an axis combined with a translation parallel to that axis. 7. An amphipod crustacean; as, the skeleton screw (Caprella). See Sand screw, under Sand.
Scrim (n.) A kind of light cotton or linen fabric, often woven in openwork patterns, -- used for curtains, etc,; -- called also India scrim. 2. Thin canvas glued on the inside of panels to prevent shrinking, checking, etc.
Scrip (n.) A small writing, certificate, or schedule; a piece of paper containing a writing. 2. A preliminary certificate of a subscription to the capital of a bank, railroad, or other company, or for a share of other joint property, or a loan, stating the amount of the subscription and the date of the payment of the installments; as, insurance scrip, consol scrip, etc. When all the installments are paid, the scrip is exchanged for a bond share certificate.
Scrog (n.) A stunted shrub, bush, or branch.
Scrub (n.) A thicket or jungle, often specified by the name of the prevailing plant; as, oak scrub, palmetto scrub, etc. 2. One of the common live stock of a region of no particular breed or not of pure breed, esp. when inferior in size, etc.
Scudo (n.) A silver coin, and money of account, used in Italy and Sicily, varying in value, in different parts, but worth about 4 shillings sterling, or about 96 cents; also, a gold coin worth about the same. 2. A gold coin of Rome, worth 64 shillings 11 pence sterling, or about $ 15.70.
Scurf (n.) Thin dry scales or scabs upon the body; especially, thin scales exfoliated from the cuticle, particularly of the scalp; dandruff. 2. Hence, the foul remains of anything adherent. 3. Minute membranous scales on the surface of some leaves, as in the goosefoot.
Scute (n.) An old French gold coin of the value of 3s. 4d. sterling, or about 80 cents. 2. A bony scale of a reptile or fish; a large horny scale on the leg of a bird, or on the belly of a snake.
Sebat (n.) The eleventh month of the ancient Hebrew year, approximately corresponding with February.
Sedan (n.) A portable chair or covered vehicle for carrying a single person, -- usually borne on poles by two men. Called also sedan chair.
Sedge (n.) Any plant of the genus Carex, perennial, endogenous herbs, often growing in dense tufts in marshy places. They have triangular jointless stems, a spiked inflorescence, and long grasslike leaves which are usually rough on the margins and midrib. There are several hundred species.
Sedum (n.) A genus of plants, mostly perennial, having succulent leaves and cymose flowers; orpine; stonecrop.
Segno (n.) A sign. See Al segno, and Dal segno.
Seine (n.) A large net, one edge of which is provided with sinkers, and the other with floats. It hangs vertically in the water, and when its ends are brought together or drawn ashore incloses the fish.
Selah (n.) A word of doubtful meaning, occuring frequently in the Psalms; by some, supposed to signify silence or a pause in the musical performance of the song.
Semen (n.) The seed or fecundating fluid of male animals; sperm. It is a white or whitish viscid fluid secreted by the testes, characterized by the presence of spermatozoids to which it owes its generative power.
Senna (n.) The leaves of several leguminous plants of the genus Cassia. (C. acutifolia, C. angustifolia, etc.). They constitute a valuable but nauseous cathartic medicine. 2. The plants themselves, native to the East, but now cultivated largely in the south of Europe and in the West Indies.
Sepia (n.) A pigment prepared from the ink, or black secretion, of the sepia, or cuttlefish. Treated with caustic potash, it has a rich brown color; and this mixed with a red forms Roman sepia. Cf. India ink, under India.
Sepoy (n.) A native of India employed as a soldier in the service of a European power, esp. of Great Britain; an Oriental soldier disciplined in the European manner.
Serai (n.) A palace; a seraglio; also, in the East, a place for the accommodation of travelers; a caravansary, or rest house.
Serge (n.) A woolen twilled stuff, much used as material for clothing for both sexes.
Serum (n.) The watery portion of certain animal fluids, as blood, milk, etc. 2. A thin watery fluid, containing more or less albumin, secreted by the serous membranes of the body, such as the pericardium and peritoneum.
Seton (n.) A few silk threads or horsehairs, or a strip of linen or the like, introduced beneath the skin by a knife or needle, so as to form an issue; also, the issue so formed.
Seven (n.) A symbol representing seven units, as 7, or vii.
Sewel (n.) A scarecrow, generally made of feathers tied to a string, hung up to prevent deer from breaking into a place.
Sewer (n.) One who sews, or stitches. 2. A small tortricid moth whose larva sews together the edges of a leaf by means of silk; as, the apple-leaf sewer (Phoxopteris nubeculana) 3. A drain or passage to carry off water and filth under ground; a subterraneous channel, particularly in cities. 4. Formerly, an upper servant, or household officer, who set on and removed the dishes at a feast, and who also brought water for the hands of the guests.
Shack (n.) The grain left after harvest or gleaning; also, nuts which have fallen to the ground. 2. A shiftless fellow; a low, itinerant beggar; a vagabond; a tramp.
Shadd (n.) Rounded stones containing tin ore, lying at the surface of the ground, and indicating a vein.
Shade (n.) An obscure place; a spot not exposed to light; hence, a secluded retreat. 2. That which intercepts, or shelters from, light or the direct rays of the sun; hence, also, that which protects from heat or currents of air; a screen; protection; shelter; cover; as, a lamp shade. 3. The soul after its separation from the body; -- so called because the ancients it to be perceptible to the sight, though not to the touch; a spirit; a ghost; as, the shades of departed heroes. 4. The darker portion of a picture; a less illuminated part. See Def. 1, above. 5. Degree or variation of color, as darker or lighter, stronger or paler; as, a delicate shade of pink. 6. A minute difference or variation, as of thought, belief, expression, etc.; also, the quality or degree of anything which is distinguished from others similar by slight differences; as, the shades of meaning in synonyms.
Shaft (n.) The slender, smooth stem of an arrow; hence, an arrow. 2. The long handle of a spear or similar weapon; hence, the weapon itself; (Fig.) anything regarded as a shaft to be thrown or darted; as, shafts of light. 3. That which resembles in some degree the stem or handle of an arrow or a spear; a long, slender part, especially when cylindrical. 4. The trunk, stem, or stalk of a plant. 5. The pole, or tongue, of a vehicle; also, a thill. 6. The handle or helve of certain tools, instruments, etc., as a hammer, a whip, etc. 7. A pole, especially a Maypole. 8. The body of a column; the cylindrical pillar between the capital and base (see Illust. of Column). Also, the part of a chimney above the roof. Also, the spire of a steeple. 9. A column, an obelisk, or other spire-shaped or columnar monument. 10. A solid or hollow cylinder or bar, having one or more journals on which it rests and revolves, and intended to carry one or more wheels or other revolving parts and to transmit power or motion; as, the shaft of a steam engine. 11. A well-like excavation in the earth, perpendicular or nearly so, made for reaching and raising ore, for raising water, etc.
Shake (n.) The act or result of shaking; a vacillating or wavering motion; a rapid motion one way and other; a trembling, quaking, or shivering; agitation. 2. A fissure or crack in timber, caused by its being dried too suddenly.
Shale (n.) A fine-grained sedimentary rock of a thin, laminated, and often friable, structure.
Shama (n.) A saxicoline singing bird (Kittacincla macroura) of India, noted for the sweetness and power of its song. In confinement it imitates the notes of other birds and various animals with accuracy. Its head, neck, back, breast, and tail are glossy black, the rump white, the under parts chestnut.
Shame (n.) A painful sensation excited by a consciousness of guilt or impropriety, or of having done something which injures reputation, or of the exposure of that which nature or modesty prompts us to conceal. 2. The cause or reason of shame; that which brings reproach, and degrades a person in the estimation of others; disgrace.
Shape (n.) To form or create; especially, to mold or make into a particular form; to give proper form or figure to. 2. To adapt to a purpose; to regulate; to adjust; to direct; as, to shape the course of a vessel. 3. Character or construction of a thing as determining its external appearance; outward aspect; make; figure; form; guise; as, the shape of a tree; the shape of the head; an elegant shape. 4. Form of embodiment, as in words; form, as of thought or conception; concrete embodiment or example, as of some quality. 5. A rolled or hammered piece, as a bar, beam, angle iron, etc., having a cross section different from merchant bar.
Shard (n.) A piece or fragment of an earthen vessel, or a like brittle substance, as the shell of an egg or snail.
Share (n.) The part which opens the ground for the reception of the seed, in a machine for sowing seed.
Sharp (n.) The character [/] used to indicate that the note before which it is placed is to be raised a half step, or semitone, in pitch. 2. A sewing needle having a very slender point; a needle of the most pointed of the three grades, blunts, betweens, and sharps. 3. Same as Middlings, 1.
Shawl (n.) A square or oblong cloth of wool, cotton, silk, or other textile or netted fabric, used, especially by women, as a loose covering for the neck and shoulders.
Shawm (n.) A wind instrument of music, formerly in use, supposed to have resembled either the clarinet or the hautboy in form.
Sheaf (n.) A quantity of the stalks and ears of wheat, rye, or other grain, bound together; a bundle of grain or straw. 2. Any collection of things bound together; a bundle; specifically, a bundle of arrows sufficient to fill a quiver, or the allowance of each archer, -- usually twenty-four.
Sheep (n. sing. & pl.) Any one of several species of ruminants of the genus Ovis, native of the higher mountains of both hemispheres, but most numerous in Asia. 2. A weak, bashful, silly fellow. 3. Fig.: The people of God, as being under the government and protection of Christ, the great Shepherd.
Sheer (n.) The longitudinal upward curvature of the deck, gunwale, and lines of a vessel, as when viewed from the side.
Sheik (n.) The head of an Arab family, or of a clan or a tribe; also, the chief magistrate of an Arab village. The name is also applied to Mohammedan ecclesiastics of a high grade.
Shell (n.) A hard outside covering, as of a fruit or an animal. 2. The covering, or outside part, of a nut; as, a hazelnut shell. 3. The hard calcareous or chitinous external covering of mollusks, crustaceans, and some other invertebrates. In some mollusks, as the cuttlefishes, it is internal, or concealed by the mantle. Also, the hard covering of some vertebrates, as the armadillo, the tortoise, and the like. 4. Hence, by extension, any mollusks having such a covering. 5. A hollow projectile, of various shapes, adapted for a mortar or a cannon, and containing an explosive substance, ignited with a fuse or by percussion, by means of which the projectile is burst and its fragments scattered. See Bomb. 6. The case which holds the powder, or charge of powder and shot, used with breechloading small arms. 7. Any slight hollow structure; a framework, or exterior structure, regarded as not complete or filled in; as, the shell of a house. 8. A coarse kind of coffin; also, a thin interior coffin inclosed in a more substantial one. 9. An instrument of music, as a lyre, -- the first lyre having been made, it is said, by drawing strings over a tortoise shell. 10. The husks of cacao seeds, a decoction of which is often used as a substitute for chocolate, cocoa, etc. 11. A light boat the frame of which is covered with thin wood or with paper; as, a racing shell.
Shend (n.) To injure, mar, spoil, or harm. 2. To blame, reproach, or revile; to degrade, disgrace, or put to shame.
Sheol (n.) The place of departed spirits; Hades; also, the grave.
Sherd (n.) A fragment; -- now used only in composition, as in potsherd. See Shard.
Sheth (n.) The part of a plow which projects downward beneath the beam, for holding the share and other working parts; -- also called standard, or post.
Shiah (n.) A member of that branch of the Mohammedans to which the Persians belong. They reject the first three caliphs, and consider Ali as being the first and only rightful successor of Mohammed. They do not acknowledge the Sunna, or body of traditions respecting Mohammed, as any part of the law, and on these accounts are treated as heretics by the Sunnites, or orthodox Mohammedans.
Shine (n.) The quality or state of shining; brightness; luster, gloss; polish; sheen.
Shire (n.) A portion of Great Britain originally under the supervision of an earl; a territorial division, usually identical with a county, but sometimes limited to a smaller district; as, Wiltshire, Yorkshire, Richmondshire, Hallamshire. 2. A division of a State, embracing several contiguous townships; a county.
Shirr (n.) A series of close parallel runnings which are drawn up so as to make the material between them set full by gatherings; -- called also shirring, and gauging.
Shirt (n.) A loose under-garment for the upper part of the body, made of cotton, linen, or other material; -- formerly used of the under-garment of either sex, now commonly restricted to that worn by men and boys.
Shive (n.) A slice; as, a shive of bread. 2. A thin piece or fragment; specifically, one of the scales or pieces of the woody part of flax removed by the operation of breaking. 3. A thin, flat cork used for stopping a wide-mouthed bottle; also, a thin wooden bung for casks.
Shoad (n.) A train of vein material mixed with rubbish; fragments of ore which have become separated by the action of water or the weather, and serve to direct in the discovery of mines.
Shoal (n.) A great multitude assembled; a crowd; a throng; -- said especially of fish; as, a shoal of bass. 2. A place where the water of a sea, lake, river, pond, etc., is shallow; a shallow.
Shock (n.) A pile or assemblage of sheaves of grain, as wheat, rye, or the like, set up in a field, the sheaves varying in number from twelve to sixteen; a stook. 2. A quivering or shaking which is the effect of a blow, collision, or violent impulse; a blow, impact, or collision; a concussion; a sudden violent impulse or onset. 3. A sudden agitation of the mind or feelings; a sensation of pleasure or pain caused by something unexpected or overpowering; also, a sudden agitating or overpowering event. 4. A sudden depression of the vital forces of the entire body, or of a port of it, marking some profound impression produced upon the nervous system, as by severe injury, overpowering emotion, or the like. 5. The sudden convulsion or contraction of the muscles, with the feeling of a concussion, caused by the discharge, through the animal system, of electricity from a charged body. 6. A thick mass of bushy hair; as, a head covered with a shock of sandy hair.
Shoer (n.) One who fits shoes to the feet; one who furnishes or puts on shoes; as, a shoer of horses.
Shole (n.) A plank fixed beneath an object, as beneath the rudder of a vessel, to protect it from injury; a plank on the ground under the end of a shore or the like.
Shook (n.) A set of staves and headings sufficient in number for one hogshead, cask, barrel, or the like, trimmed, and bound together in compact form. 2. The parts of a piece of house furniture, as a bedstead, packed together.
Shoot (n.) An inclined plane, either artificial or natural, down which timber, coal, etc., are caused to slide; also, a narrow passage, either natural or artificial, in a stream, where the water rushes rapidly; esp., a channel, having a swift current, connecting the ends of a bend in the stream, so as to shorten the course. 2. The act of shooting; the discharge of a missile; a shot; as, the shoot of a shuttle.
Shore (n.) A prop, as a timber, placed as a brace or support against the side of a building or other structure; a prop placed beneath anything, as a beam, to prevent it from sinking or sagging.
Short (n.) Short, inferior hemp. 2. A short sound, syllable, or vowel.
Shout (n.) A loud burst of voice or voices; a vehement and sudden outcry, especially of a multitudes expressing joy, triumph, exultation, or animated courage.
Shred (n.) A long, narrow piece cut or torn off; a strip. 2. In general, a fragment; a piece; a particle. 3. To cut or tear into small pieces, particularly narrow and long pieces, as of cloth or leather.
Shrub (n.) A liquor composed of vegetable acid, especially lemon juice, and sugar, with spirit to preserve it. 2. A woody plant of less size than a tree, and usually with several stems from the same root.
Shrug (n.) A drawing up of the shoulders, -- a motion usually expressing dislike, dread, or doubt.
Shuck (n.) A shell, husk, or pod; especially, the outer covering of such nuts as the hickory nut, butternut, peanut, and chestnut.
Shude (n.) The husks and other refuse of rice mills, used to adulterate oil cake, or linseed cake.
Shute (n.) Same as Chute, or Shoot.
Siaga (n.) The ahu, or jairou.
Sicca (n.) A seal; a coining die; -- used adjectively to designate the silver currency of the Mogul emperors, or the Indian rupee of 192 grains.
Siege (n.) A seat; especially, a royal seat; a throne. 2. Hence, place or situation; seat. 3. The sitting of an army around or before a fortified place for the purpose of compelling the garrison to surrender; the surrounding or investing of a place by an army, and approaching it by passages and advanced works, which cover the besiegers from the enemy's fire. See the Note under Blockade. 4. Hence, a continued attempt to gain possession.
Sieve (n.) A utensil for separating the finer and coarser parts of a pulverized or granulated substance from each other. It consist of a vessel, usually shallow, with the bottom perforated, or made of hair, wire, or the like, woven in meshes.
Sigla (n. pl.) The signs, abbreviations, letters, or characters standing for words, shorthand, etc., in ancient manuscripts, or on coins, medals, etc.
Sigma (n.) The Greek letter /, /, or / (English S, or s). It originally had the form of the English C.
Sikhs (n. pl.) A religious sect noted for warlike traits, founded in the Punjab at the end of the 15th century.
Silex (n.) Silica, SiO2 as found in nature, constituting quarz, and most sands and sandstones. See Silica, and Silicic.
Silly (n.) Weak in intellect; destitute of ordinary strength of mind; foolish; witless; simple; as, a silly woman. 2. Proceeding from want of understanding or common judgment; characterized by weakness or folly; unwise; absurd; stupid; as, silly conduct; a silly question.
Silva (n.) The forest trees of a region or country, considered collectively.
Sinch (n.) A saddle girth made of leather, canvas, woven horsehair, or woven grass.
Sinus (n.) A cavity in a bone or other part, either closed or with a narrow opening. 2. A narrow, elongated cavity, in which pus is collected; an elongated abscess with only a small orifice.
Siren (n.) One of three sea nymphs, -- or, according to some writers, of two, -- said to frequent an island near the coast of Italy, and to sing with such sweetness that they lured mariners to destruction. 2. An enticing, dangerous woman. 3. Any long, slender amphibian of the genus Siren or family Sirenidae, destitute of hind legs and pelvis, and having permanent external gills as well as lungs. They inhabit the swamps, lagoons, and ditches of the Southern United States. The more common species (Siren lacertina) is dull lead-gray in color, and becames two feet long.
Syrup (n.) A thick and viscid liquid made from the juice of fruits, herbs, etc., boiled with sugar. 2. A thick and viscid saccharine solution of superior quality (as sugarhouse sirup or molasses, maple sirup); specifically, in pharmacy and often in cookery, a saturated solution of sugar and water (simple sirup), or such a solution flavored or medicated.
Situs (n.) The method in which the parts of a plant are arranged; also, the position of the parts.
Sixty (n.) A symbol representing sixty units, as 60, lx., or LX.
Sizar (n.) One of a body of students in the universities of Cambridge (Eng.) and Dublin, who, having passed a certain examination, are exempted from paying college fees and charges. A sizar corresponded to a servitor at Oxford.
Sizel (n.) Same as Scissel, 2.
Sizer (n.) An instrument or contrivance to size articles, or to determine their size by a standard, or to separate and distribute them according to size.
Skate (n.) A metallic runner with a frame shaped to fit the sole of a shoe, -- made to be fastened under the foot, and used for moving rapidly on ice. 2. Any one of numerous species of large, flat elasmobranch fishes of the genus Raia, having a long, slender tail, terminated by a small caudal fin. The pectoral fins, which are large and broad and united to the sides of the body and head, give a somewhat rhombic form to these fishes. The skin is more or less spinose.
Skean (n.) A knife or short dagger, esp. that in use among the Highlanders of Scotland. [Variously spelt.]
Skeet (n.) A scoop with a long handle, used to wash the sides of a vessel, and formerly to wet the sails or deck.
Skein (n.) A quantity of yarn, thread, or the like, put up together, after it is taken from the reel, -- usually tied in a sort of knot.
Skelp (n.) A squall; also, a heavy fall of rain. 2. A wrought-iron plate from which a gun barrel or pipe is made by bending and welding the edges together, and drawing the thick tube thus formed.
Skiff (n.) A small, light boat.
Skill (n.) The familiar knowledge of any art or science, united with readiness and dexterity in execution or performance, or in the application of the art or science to practical purposes; power to discern and execute; ability to perceive and perform; expertness; aptitude; as, the skill of a mathematician, physician, surgeon, mechanic, etc.
Skink (n.) Any one of numerous species of regularly scaled harmless lizards of the family Scincidae, common in the warmer parts of all the continents. 2. Drink; also, pottage.
Skirt (n.) The lower and loose part of a coat, dress, or other like garment; the part below the waist; as, the skirt of a coat, a dress, or a mantle. 2. The diaphragm, or midriff, in animals.
Skull (n.) A school, company, or shoal. 2. The skeleton of the head of a vertebrate animal, including the brain case, or cranium, and the bones and cartilages of the face and mouth. See Illusts. of Carnivora, of Facial angles under Facial, and of Skeleton, in Appendix.
Skunk (n.) Any one of several species of American musteline carnivores of the genus Mephitis and allied genera. They have two glands near the anus, secreting an extremely fetid liquid, which the animal ejects at pleasure as a means of defense.
Slack (n.) Small coal; also, coal dust; culm. 2. A valley, or small, shallow dell. 3. The part of anything that hangs loose, having no strain upon it; as, the slack of a rope or of a sail.
Slade (n.) A little dell or valley; a flat piece of low, moist ground.
Slang (n.) Any long, narrow piece of land; a promontory. 2. Low, vulgar, unauthorized language; a popular but unauthorized word, phrase, or mode of expression; also, the jargon of some particular calling or class in society; low popular cant; as, the slang of the theater, of college, of sailors, etc.
Slant (n.) A slanting direction or plane; a slope; as, it lies on a slant.
Slash (n.) A large slit in the material of any garment, made to show the lining through the openings.
Slave (n.) A person who is held in bondage to another; one who is wholly subject to the will of another; one who is held as a chattel; one who has no freedom of action, but whose person and services are wholly under the control of another. 2. One who has lost the power of resistance; one who surrenders himself to any power whatever; as, a slave to passion, to lust, to strong drink, to ambition.
Sleet (n.) Hail or snow, mingled with rain, usually falling, or driven by the wind, in fine particles.
Slide (n.) The act of sliding; as, a slide on the ice. 2. Smooth, even passage or progress. 3. An inclined plane on which heavy bodies slide by the force of gravity, esp. one constructed on a mountain side for conveying logs by sliding them down. 4. A clasp or brooch for a belt, or the like. 5. A plate or slip of glass on which is a picture or delineation to be exhibited by means of a magic lantern, stereopticon, or the like; a plate on which is an object to be examined with a microscope. 6. The descent of a mass of earth, rock, or snow down a hill or mountain side; as, a land slide, or a snow slide; also, the track of bare rock left by a land slide. 7. A grace consisting of two or more small notes moving by conjoint degrees, and leading to a principal note either above or below. 8. A sound which, by a gradual change in the position of the vocal organs, passes imperceptibly into another sound. 9. Same as Guide bar, under Guide.
Slime (n.) Soft, moist earth or clay, having an adhesive quality; viscous mud. 2. Any mucilaginous substance; any substance of a dirty nature, that is moist, soft, and adhesive. 3. Mud containing metallic ore, obtained in the preparatory dressing.
Slink (n.) The young of a beast brought forth prematurely, esp. a calf brought forth before its time.
Slish (n.) A cut; as, slish and slash.
Sloat (n.) A narrow piece of timber which holds together large pieces; a slat; as, the sloats of a cart.
Sloop (n.) A vessel having one mast and fore-and-aft rig, consisting of a boom-and-gaff mainsail, jibs, staysail, and gaff topsail. The typical sloop has a fixed bowsprit, topmast, and standing rigging, while those of a cutter are capable of being readily shifted. The sloop usually carries a centerboard, and depends for stability upon breadth of beam rather than depth of keel. The two types have rapidly approximated since 1880. One radical distinction is that a slop may carry a centerboard. See Cutter, and Illustration in Appendix.
Sloth (n.) Any one of several species of arboreal edentates constituting the family Bradypodidae, and the suborder Tardigrada. They have long exserted limbs and long prehensile claws. Both jaws are furnished with teeth (see Illust. of Edentata), and the ears and tail are rudimentary. They inhabit South and Central America and Mexico.
Slump (n.) The noise made by anything falling into a hole, or into a soft, miry place.
Slush (n.) A soft mixture of grease and other materials, used for lubrication. 2. The refuse grease and fat collected in cooking, especially on shipboard. 3. A mixture of white lead and lime, with which the bright parts of machines, such as the connecting rods of steamboats, are painted to be preserved from oxidation.
Slype (n.) A narrow passage between two buildings, as between the transept and chapter house of a monastery.
Smack (n.) A small sailing vessel, commonly rigged as a sloop, used chiefly in the coasting and fishing trade. 2. To kiss with a close compression of the lips, so as to make a sound when they separate; to kiss with a sharp noise; to buss.
Small (n.) The small or slender part of a thing; as, the small of the leg or of the back. 2. Same as Little go. See under Little, a.
Smash (n.) Hence, bankruptcy.
Smear (n.) To overspread with anything unctuous, viscous, or adhesive; to daub; as, to smear anything with oil. 2. To soil in any way; to contaminate; to pollute; to stain morally; as, to be smeared with infamy. 3. A fat, oily substance; oinment. 4. Hence, a spot made by, or as by, an unctuous or adhesive substance; a blot or blotch; a daub; a stain.
Smeir (n.) A salt glaze on pottery, made by adding common salt to an earthenware glaze.
Smell (n.) To perceive by the olfactory nerves, or organs of smell; to have a sensation of, excited through the nasal organs when affected by the appropriate materials or qualities; to obtain the scent of; as, to smell a rose; to smell perfumes. 2. To detect or perceive, as if by the sense of smell; to scent out; -- often with out.
Smelt (n.) Any one of numerous species of small silvery salmonoid fishes of the genus Osmerus and allied genera, which ascend rivers to spawn, and sometimes become landlocked in lakes. They are esteemed as food, and have a peculiar odor and taste.
Smift (n.) A match for firing a charge of powder, as in blasting; a fuse.
Smith (n.) One who forges with the hammer; one who works in metals; as, a blacksmith, goldsmith, silversmith, and the like.
Smoke (n.) The visible exhalation, vapor, or substance that escapes, or expelled, from a burning body, especially from burning vegetable matter, as wood, coal, peat, or the like. 2. Anything unsubstantial, as idle talk. 3. The act of smoking, esp. of smoking tobacco; as, to have a smoke. 4. Hence, to burn; to be kindled; to rage. 5. To draw into the mouth the smoke of tobacco burning in a pipe or in the form of a cigar, cigarette, etc.; to habitually use tobacco in this manner.
Smolt (n.) A young salmon two or three years old, when it has acquired its silvery color.
Snail (n.) Any one of numerous species of terrestrial air-breathing gastropods belonging to the genus Helix and many allied genera of the family Helicidae. They are abundant in nearly all parts of the world except the arctic regions, and feed almost entirely on vegetation; a land snail. 2. Any gastropod having a general resemblance to the true snails, including fresh-water and marine species. See Pond snail, under Pond, and Sea snail. 3. Hence, a drone; a slow-moving person or thing. 4. A spiral cam, or a flat piece of metal of spirally curved outline, used for giving motion to, or changing the position of, another part, as the hammer tail of a striking clock. 5. A tortoise; in ancient warfare, a movable roof or shed to protect besiegers; a testudo.
Snake (n.) Any species of the order Ophidia; an ophidian; a serpent, whether harmless or venomous. See Ophidia, and Serpent.
Snare (n.) A contrivance, often consisting of a noose of cord, or the like, by which a bird or other animal may be entangled and caught; a trap; a gin. 2. Hence, anything by which one is entangled and brought into trouble. 3. An instrument, consisting usually of a wireloop or noose, for removing tumors, etc., by avulsion.
Snarl (n.) A knot or complication of hair, thread, or the like, difficult to disentangle; entanglement; hence, intricate complication; embarrassing difficulty.
Sneak (n.) A mean, sneaking fellow.
Sneer (n.) A smile, grin, or contortion of the face, indicative of contempt; an indirect expression or insinuation of contempt.
Snell (n.) A short line of horsehair, gut, etc., by which a fishhook is attached to a longer line.
Snick (n.) A slight hit or tip of the ball, often unintentional. 2. A snip or cut, as in the hair of a beast.
Sniff (n.) The act of sniffing; perception by sniffing; that which is taken by sniffing; as, a sniff of air.
Snipe (n.) Any one of numerous species of limicoline game birds of the family Scolopacidae, having a long, slender, nearly straight beak.
Snood (n.) The fillet which binds the hair of a young unmarried woman, and is emblematic of her maiden character.
Snook (n.) A large perchlike marine food fish (Centropomus undecimalis) found both on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of tropical America; -- called also ravallia, and robalo.
Snout (n.) The long, projecting nose of a beast, as of swine. 2. The nozzle of a pipe, hose, etc.
Snuff (n.) Pulverized tobacco, etc., prepared to be taken into the nose; also, the amount taken at once. 2. Resentment, displeasure, or contempt, expressed by a snuffing of the nose.
Socle (n.) A plain block or plinth forming a low pedestal; any base; especially, the base of a statue, column, or the like. See Plinth.
Softa (n.) Any one attached to a Mohammedan mosque, esp. a student of the higher branches of theology in a mosque school.
Soken (n.) A toll. See Soc, n., 2.
Solen (n.) A cradle, as for a broken limb. See Cradle, 6.
Solid (n.) A magnitude which has length, breadth, and thickness; a part of space bounded on all sides.
Solon (n.) A celebrated Athenian lawmaker, born about 638 b. c.; hence, a legislator; a publicist; -- often used ironically.
Samaj (n.) A society; a congregation; a worshiping assembly, or church, esp. of the Brahmo-somaj.
Sorex (n.) A genus of small Insectivora, including the common shrews.
Sorus (n.) One of the fruit dots, or small clusters of sporangia, on the back of the fronds of ferns.
Sound (n.) The air bladder of a fish; as, cod sounds are an esteemed article of food. 2. A narrow passage of water, or a strait between the mainland and an island; also, a strait connecting two seas, or connecting a sea or lake with the ocean; as, the Sound between the Baltic and the german Ocean; Long Island Sound. 3. Any elongated instrument or probe, usually metallic, by which cavities of the body are sounded or explored, especially the bladder for stone, or the urethra for a stricture. 4. The peceived object occasioned by the impulse or vibration of a material substance affecting the ear; a sensation or perception of the mind received through the ear, and produced by the impulse or vibration of the air or other medium with which the ear is in contact; the effect of an impression made on the organs of hearing by an impulse or vibration of the air caused by a collision of bodies, or by other means; noise; report; as, the sound of a drum; the sound of the human voice; a horrid sound; a charming sound; a sharp, high, or shrill sound. 5. The occasion of sound; the impulse or vibration which would occasion sound to a percipient if present with unimpaired; hence, the theory of vibrations in elastic media such cause sound; as, a treatise on sound.
Souse (n.) Something kept or steeped in pickle; esp., the pickled ears, feet, etc., of swine. 2. The ear; especially, a hog's ear. 3. The act of sousing, or swooping.
South (n.) A country, region, or place situated farther to the south than another; the southern section of a country.
Sowar (n.) In India, a mounted soldier.
Sower (n.) One who, or that which, sows.
Spaad (n.) A kind of spar; earth flax, or amianthus.
Space (n.) Extension, considered independently of anything which it may contain; that which makes extended objects conceivable and possible. 2. Place, having more or less extension; room. 3. A quantity or portion of extension; distance from one thing to another; an interval between any two or more objects; as, the space between two stars or two hills; the sound was heard for the space of a mile. 4. A small piece of metal cast lower than a face type, so as not to receive the ink in printing, -- used to separate words or letters. 5. The distance or interval between words or letters in the lines, or between lines, as in books. 6. One of the intervals, or open places, between the lines of the staff. 7. To arrange or adjust the spaces in or between; as, to space words, lines, or letters.
Spade (n.) An implement for digging or cutting the ground, consisting usually of an oblong and nearly rectangular blade of iron, with a handle like that of a shovel.
Spado (n.) Same as Spade, 2.
Spale (n.) A lath; a shaving or chip, as of wood or stone.
Spall (n.) A chip or fragment, especially a chip of stone as struck off the block by the hammer, having at least one feather-edge.
Spare (n.) The right of bowling again at a full set of pins, after having knocked all the pins down in less than three bowls. If all the pins are knocked down in one bowl it is a double spare; in two bowls, a single spare.
Spark (n.) A small, shining body, or transient light; a sparkle. 2. That which, like a spark, may be kindled into a flame, or into action; a feeble germ; an elementary principle. 3. A brisk, showy, gay man.
Spawl (n.) A splinter or fragment, as of wood or stone. See Spall.
Spear (n.) A long, pointed weapon, used in war and hunting, by thrusting or throwing; a weapon with a long shaft and a sharp head or blade; a lance. 2. A sharp-pointed instrument with barbs, used for stabbing fish and other animals. 3. A shoot, as of grass; a spire. 4. The feather of a horse. See Feather, n., 4. 5. The rod to which the bucket, or plunger, of a pump is attached; a pump rod.
Speck (n.) The blubber of whales or other marine mammals; also, the fat of the hippopotamus. 2. A small discolored place in or on anything, or a small place of a color different from that of the main substance; a spot; a stain; a blemish; as, a speck on paper or loth; specks of decay in fruit. 3. A very small thing; a particle; a mite; as, specks of dust; he has not a speck of money.
Speed (n.) The act or state of moving swiftly; swiftness; velocity; rapidly; rate of motion; dispatch; as, the speed a horse or a vessel. 2. One who, or that which, causes or promotes speed or success. 3. To experience in going; to have any condition, good or ill; to fare.
Spell (n.) A spelk, or splinter. 2. The relief of one person by another in any piece of work or watching; also, a turn at work which is carried on by one person or gang relieving another; as, a spell at the pumps; a spell at the masthead. 3. The time during which one person or gang works until relieved; hence, any relatively short period of time, whether a few hours, days, or weeks. 4. A gratuitous helping forward of another's work; as, a logging spell. 5. A stanza, verse, or phrase supposed to be endowed with magical power; an incantation; hence, any charm.
Sphex (n.) Any one of numerous species of sand wasps of the genus Sphex and allied genera. These wasps have the abdomen attached to the thorax by a slender pedicel. See Illust. of Sand wasp, under Sand.
Spica (n.) A kind of bandage passing, by successive turns and crosses, from an extremity to the trunk; -- so called from its resemblance to a spike of a barley.
Spice (n.) A vegetable production of many kinds, fragrant or aromatic and pungent to the taste, as pepper, cinnamon, nutmeg, mace, allspice, ginger, cloves, etc., which are used in cookery and to flavor sauces, pickles, etc. 2. Figuratively, that which enriches or alters the quality of a thing in a small degree, as spice alters the taste of food; that which gives zest or pungency; a slight flavoring; a relish; hence, a small quantity or admixture; a sprinkling; as, a spice of mischief.
Spike (n.) A sort of very large nail; also, a piece of pointed iron set with points upward or outward.
Spile (n.) A small plug or wooden pin, used to stop a vent, as in a cask. 2. A small tube or spout inserted in a tree for conducting sap, as from a sugar maple.
Spill (n.) A peg or pin for plugging a hole, as in a cask; a spile. 2. A small roll of paper, or slip of wood, used as a lamplighter, etc.
Spine (n.) The backbone, or spinal column, of an animal; -- so called from the projecting processes upon the vertebrae.
Spire (n.) A slender stalk or blade in vegetation; as, a spire grass or of wheat. 2. A tapering body that shoots up or out to a point in a conical or pyramidal form. Specifically (Arch.), the roof of a tower when of a pyramidal form and high in proportion to its width; also, the pyramidal or aspiring termination of a tower which can not be said to have a roof, such as that of Strasburg cathedral; the tapering part of a steeple, or the steeple itself. 3. The top, or uppermost point, of anything; the summit. 4. The part of a spiral generated in one revolution of the straight line about the pole. See Spiral, n.
Spite (n.) Ill-will or hatred toward another, accompanied with the disposition to irritate, annoy, or thwart; petty malice; grudge; rancor; despite.
Split (n.) A crack, or longitudinal fissure. 2. A breach or separation, as in a political party; a division. 3. A piece that is split off, or made thin, by splitting; a splinter; a fragment. 4. Specif (Leather Manuf.), one of the sections of a skin made by dividing it into two or more thicknesses. 5. the substitution of more than one share of a corporation's stock for one share. The market price of the stock usually drops in proportion to the increase in outstanding shares of stock. The split may be in any ratio, as a two-for-one split; a three-for-two split. 6. the division by a player of one hand of blackjack into two hands, allowed when the first two cards dealt to a player have the same value; the player is usually obliged to increase the amount wagered by placing a sum equal to the original bet on the new hand thus created.
Spoil (n.) That which is taken from another by violence; especially, the plunder taken from an enemy; pillage; booty. 2. Public offices and their emoluments regarded as the peculiar property of a successful party or faction, to be bestowed for its own advantage; -- commonly in the plural; as to the victor belong the spoils. 3. The slough, or cast skin, of a serpent or other animal.
Spoke (n.) The radius or ray of a wheel; one of the small bars which are inserted in the hub, or nave, and which serve to support the rim or felly. 2. A rung, or round, of a ladder. 3. A contrivance for fastening the wheel of a vehicle, to prevent it from turning in going down a hill.
Spong (n.) An irregular, narrow, projecting part of a field.
Spool (n.) A piece of cane or red with a knot at each end, or a hollow cylinder of wood with a ridge at each end, used to wind thread or yarn upon.
Spoon (n.) An implement consisting of a small bowl (usually a shallow oval) with a handle, used especially in preparing or eating food. 2. Anything which resembles a spoon in shape; esp. (Fishing), a spoon bait.
Spoor (n.) The track or trail of any wild animal; as, the spoor of an elephant; -- used originally by travelers in South Africa.
Spore (n.) One of the minute grains in flowerless plants, which are analogous to seeds, as serving to reproduce the species. 2. A minute grain or germ; a small, round or ovoid body, formed in certain organisms, and by germination giving rise to a new organism; as, the reproductive spores of bacteria, etc. 3. One of the parts formed by fission in certain Protozoa. See Spore formation, belw.
Sport (n.) That which diverts, and makes mirth; pastime; amusement. 2. That with which one plays, or which is driven about in play; a toy; a plaything; an object of mockery. 3. Diversion of the field, as fowling, hunting, fishing, racing, games, and the like, esp. when money is staked. 4. A plant or an animal, or part of a plant or animal, which has some peculiarity not usually seen in the species; an abnormal variety or growth. See Sporting plant, under Sporting.
Sprat (n.) A California surf-fish (Rhacochilus toxotes); -- called also alfione, and perch.
Spray (n.) A collective body of small branches; as, the tree has a beautiful spray. 2. A side channel or branch of the runner of a flask, made to distribute the metal in all parts of the mold.
Spree (n.) A merry frolic; especially, a drinking frolic; a carousal.
Sprig (n.) A small shoot or twig of a tree or other plant; a spray; as, a sprig of laurel or of parsley. 2. A brad, or nail without a head.
Sprue (n.) Strictly, the hole through which melted metal is poured into the gate, and thence into the mold. 2. The waste piece of metal cast in this hole; hence, dross.
Spume (n.) Frothy matter raised on liquids by boiling, effervescence, or agitation; froth; foam; scum.
Spunk (n.) Wood that readily takes fire; touchwood; also, a kind of tinder made from a species of fungus; punk; amadou. 2. An inflammable temper; spirit; mettle; pluck; as, a man of spunk.
Sourt (n.) A sudden or violent ejection or gushing of a liquid, as of water from a tube, orifice, or other confined place, or of blood from a wound; a jet; a spirt. 2. Fig.: A sudden outbreak; as, a spurt of jealousy.
Spurt (n.) A sudden and energetic effort, as in an emergency; an increased exertion for a brief space.
Spyne (n.) See Pinnace, n., 1 (a).
Squab (n.) A neatling of a pigeon or other similar bird, esp. when very fat and not fully fledged. 2. A person of a short, fat figure. 3. A thickly stuffed cushion; especially, one used for the seat of a sofa, couch, or chair; also, a sofa.
Squad (n.) A small party of men assembled for drill, inspection, or other purposes. 2. Hence, any small party.
Squat (n.) The posture of one that sits on his heels or hams, or close to the ground.
Squaw (n.) A female; a woman; -- in the language of Indian tribes of the Algonquin family, correlative of sannup.
Squid (n.) Any one of numerous species of ten-armed cephalopods having a long, tapered body, and a caudal fin on each side; especially, any species of Loligo, Ommastrephes, and related genera. See Calamary, Decacerata, Dibranchiata. 2. A fishhook with a piece of bright lead, bone, or other substance, fastened on its shank to imitate a squid.
Stack (n.) To lay in a conical or other pile; to make into a large pile; as, to stack hay, cornstalks, or grain; to stack or place wood.
Staff (n.) A long piece of wood; a stick; the long handle of an instrument or weapon; a pole or srick, used for many purposes; as, a surveyor's staff; the staff of a spear or pike. 2. A stick carried in the hand for support or defense by a person walking; hence, a support; that which props or upholds. 3. A pole, stick, or wand borne as an ensign of authority; a badge of office; as, a constable's staff. 4. A series of verses so disposed that, when it is concluded, the same order begins again; a stanza; a stave. 5. An arbor, as of a wheel or a pinion of a watch. 6. The grooved director for the gorget, or knife, used in cutting for stone in the bladder. 7. An establishment of officers in various departments attached to an army, to a section of an army, or to the commander of an army. The general's staff consists of those officers about his person who are employed in carrying his commands into execution. See Etat Major. 8. Hence: A body of assistants serving to carry into effect the plans of a superintendant or manager; as, the staff of a newspaper.
Stage (n.) An elevated platform on which an orator may speak, a play be performed, an exhibition be presented, or the like. 2. A floor elevated for the convenience of mechanical work, or the like; a scaffold; a staging. 3. A platform, often floating, serving as a kind of wharf. 4. The floor for scenic performances; hence, the theater; the playhouse; hence, also, the profession of representing dramatic compositions; the drama, as acted or exhibited. 5. The platform of a microscope, upon which an object is placed to be viewed. See Illust. of Microscope. 6. A degree of advancement in a journey; one of several portions into which a road or course is marked off; the distance between two places of rest on a road; as, a stage of ten miles. 7. A degree of advancement in any pursuit, or of progress toward an end or result. 8. One of several marked phases or periods in the development and growth of many animals and plants; as, the larval stage; pupa stage; zoea stage.
Stail (n.) A handle, as of a mop; a stale.
Stain (n.) A discoloration by foreign matter; a spot; as, a stain on a garment or cloth.
Stair (n.) A series of steps, as for passing from one story of a house to another; -- commonly used in the plural; but originally used in the singular only.
Stale (n.) The stock or handle of anything; as, the stale of a rake.
Stalk (n.) The stem or main axis of a plant; as, a stalk of wheat, rye, or oats; the stalks of maize or hemp. 2. The petiole, pedicel, or peduncle, of a plant. 3. That which resembes the stalk of a plant, as the stem of a quill. 4. An ornament in the Corinthian capital resembling the stalk of a plant, from which the volutes and helices spring. 5. A stem or peduncle, as of certain barnacles and crinoids. 6. A high, proud, stately step or walk.
Stamp (n.) The act of stamping, as with the foot. 2. The which stamps; any instrument for making impressions on other bodies, as a die.
Stand (n.) To be supported on the feet, in an erect or nearly erect position; -- opposed to lie, sit, kneel, etc. 2. To continue upright in a certain locality, as a tree fixed by the roots, or a building resting on its foundation. 3. To occupy or hold a place; to have a situation; to be situated or located; as, Paris stands on the Seine. 4. To remain without ruin or injury; to hold good against tendencies to impair or injure; to be permanent; to endure; to last; hence, to find endurance, strength, or resources. 5. To maintain an invincible or permanent attitude; to be fixed, steady, or firm; to take a position in resistance or opposition. 6. To have or maintain a position, order, or rank; to be in a particular relation; as, Christian charity, or love, stands first in the rank of gifts. 7. To hold a course at sea; as, to stand from the shore; to stand for the harbor. 8. To offer one's self, or to be offered, as a candidate.
Stang (n.) In land measure, a pole, rod, or perch.
Start (n.) The act of starting; a sudden spring, leap, or motion, caused by surprise, fear, pain, or the like; any sudden motion, or beginning of motion. 2. A convulsive motion, twitch, or spasm; a spasmodic effort. 3. A sudden, unexpected movement; a sudden and capricious impulse; a sally; as, starts of fancy. 4. The beginning, as of a journey or a course of action; first motion from a place; act of setting out; the outset; -- opposed to finish.
State (n.) Rank; condition; quality; as, the state of honor. 2. A chair with a canopy above it, often standing on a dais; a seat of dignity; also, the canopy itself. 3. Estate, possession. 4. Any body of men united by profession, or constituting a community of a particular character; as, the civil and ecclesiastical states, or the lords spiritual and temporal and the commons, in Great Britain. Cf. Estate, n., 6. 5. The bodies that constitute the legislature of a country; as, the States-general of Holland. 6. A form of government which is not monarchial, as a republic. 7. A political body, or body politic; the whole body of people who are united one government, whatever may be the form of the government; a nation. 8. In the United States, one of the commonwealth, or bodies politic, the people of which make up the body of the nation, and which, under the national constitution, stands in certain specified relations with the national government, and are invested, as commonwealth, with full power in their several spheres over all matters not expressly inhibited. 9. Highest and stationary condition, as that of maturity between growth and decline, or as that of crisis between the increase and the abating of a disease; height; acme. 10. A statement; also, a document containing a statement.
Stave (n.) One of a number of narrow strips of wood, or narrow iron plates, placed edge to edge to form the sides, covering, or lining of a vessel or structure; esp., one of the strips which form the sides of a cask, a pail, etc. 2. One of the cylindrical bars of a lantern wheel; one of the bars or rounds of a rack, a ladder, etc. 3. To break in a stave or the staves of; to break a hole in; to burst; -- often with in; as, to stave a cask; to stave in a boat. 4. To push, as with a staff; -- with off. 5. To delay by force or craft; to drive away; -- usually with off; as, to stave off the execution of a project. 6. To suffer, or cause, to be lost by breaking the cask. 7. To render impervious or solid by driving with a calking iron; as, to stave lead, or the joints of pipes into which lead has been run.
Stead (n.) Place, or spot, in general. 2. Place or room which another had, has, or might have.
Steal (n.) A handle; a stale, or stele.
Steam (n.) The elastic, aeriform fluid into which water is converted when heated to the boiling points; water in the state of vapor.
Steed (n.) A horse, especially a spirited horse for state of war; -- used chiefly in poetry or stately prose.
Steel (n.) A variety of iron intermediate in composition and properties between wrought iron and cast iron (containing between one half of one per cent and one and a half per cent of carbon), and consisting of an alloy of iron with an iron carbide. Steel, unlike wrought iron, can be tempered, and retains magnetism. Its malleability decreases, and fusibility increases, with an increase in carbon. 2. A weapon, as a sword, dagger, etc. 3. To overlay, point, or edge with steel; as, to steel a razor; to steel an ax. 4. To make hard or strong; hence, to make insensible or obdurate. 5. Fig.: To cause to resemble steel, as in smoothness, polish, or other qualities. 6. To cover, as an electrotype plate, with a thin layer of iron by electrolysis. The iron thus deposited is very hard, like steel.
Steen (n.) A wall of brick, stone, or cement, used as a lining, as of a well, cistern, etc.; a steening.
Steep (n.) Something steeped, or used in steeping; a fertilizing liquid to hasten the germination of seeds. 2. A precipitous place, hill, mountain, rock, or ascent; any elevated object sloping with a large angle to the plane of the horizon; a precipice.
Steer (n.) A helmsman, a pilot.
Stela (n.) A small column or pillar, used as a monument, milestone, etc.
Stele (n.) A stale, or handle; a stalk.
Stere (n.) A unit of cubic measure in the metric system, being a cubic meter, or kiloliter, and equal to 35.3 cubic feet, or nearly 1/ cubic yards.
Stich (n.) A verse, of whatever measure or number of feet. 2. A line in the Scriptures; specifically (Hebrew Scriptures), one of the rhythmic lines in the poetical books and passages of the Old Treatment, as written in the oldest Hebrew manuscripts and in the Revised Version of the English Bible. 3. A row, line, or rank of trees.
Stick (n.) To penetrate with a pointed instrument; to pierce; to stab; hence, to kill by piercing; as, to stick a beast. 2. To cause to penetrate; to push, thrust, or drive, so as to pierce; as, to stick a needle into one's finger. 3. To fasten, attach, or cause to remain, by thrusting in; hence, also, to adorn or deck with things fastened on as by piercing; as, to stick a pin on the sleeve. 4. To set; to fix in; as, to stick card teeth. 5. To set with something pointed; as, to stick cards. 6. To fix on a pointed instrument; to impale; as, to stick an apple on a fork. 7. To attach by causing to adhere to the surface; as, to stick on a plaster; to stick a stamp on an envelope; also, to attach in any manner. 8. To compose; to set, or arrange, in a composing stick; as, to stick type. 9. To run or plane (moldings) in a machine, in contradistinction to working them by hand. Such moldings are said to be stuck. 10. To cause to stick; to bring to a stand; to pose; to puzzle; as, to stick one with a hard problem. 11. To impose upon; to compel to pay; sometimes, to cheat.
Stile (n.) A pin set on the face of a dial, to cast a shadow; a style. See Style.
Still (n.) Freedom from noise; calm; silence; as, the still of midnight.
Stilt (n.) A pole, or piece of wood, constructed with a step or loop to raise the foot above the ground in walking. It is sometimes lashed to the leg, and sometimes prolonged upward so as to be steadied by the hand or arm. 2. A crutch; also, the handle of a plow. 3. Any species of limicoline birds belonging to Himantopus and allied genera, in which the legs are remarkably long and slender. Called also longshanks, stiltbird, stilt plover, and lawyer.
Stink (n.) A strong, offensive smell; a disgusting odor; a stench.
Stint (n.) Any one of several species of small sandpipers, as the sanderling of Europe and America, the dunlin, the little stint of India (Tringa minuta), etc. Called also pume.
Stipe (n.) The stalk or petiole of a frond, as of a fern.
Stoat (n.) The ermine in its summer pelage, when it is reddish brown, but with a black tip to the tail. The name is sometimes applied also to other brown weasels.
Stock (n.) The stem, or main body, of a tree or plant; the fixed, strong, firm part; the trunk. 2. Hence, a person who is as dull and lifeless as a stock or post; one who has little sense. 3. The principal supporting part; the part in which others are inserted, or to which they are attached. 4. The wood to which the barrel, lock, etc., of a musket or like firearm are secured; also, a long, rectangular piece of wood, which is an important part of several forms of gun carriage. 5. The block of wood or metal frame which constitutes the body of a plane, and in which the plane iron is fitted; a plane stock. 6. The support of the block in which an anvil is fixed, or of the anvil itself. 7. The part of a tally formerly struck in the exchequer, which was delivered to the person who had lent the king money on account, as the evidence of indebtedness. See Counterfoil. 8. The original progenitor; also, the race or line of a family; the progenitor of a family and his direct descendants; lineage; family. 9. Money or capital which an individual or a firm employs in business; fund; in the United States, the capital of a bank or other company, in the form of transferable shares, each of a certain amount; money funded in government securities, called also the public funds; in the plural, property consisting of shares in joint-stock companies, or in the obligations of a government for its funded debt; -- so in the United States, but in England the latter only are called stocks, and the former shares. 10. Same as Stock account, below. 11. Supply provided; store; accumulation; especially, a merchant's or manufacturer's store of goods; as, to lay in a stock of provisions. 12. Domestic animals or beasts collectively, used or raised on a farm; as, a stock of cattle or of sheep, etc.; -- called also live stock. 13. That portion of a pack of cards not distributed to the players at the beginning of certain games, as gleek, etc., but which might be drawn from afterward as occasion required; a bank. 14. A covering for the leg, or leg and foot; as, upper stocks (breeches); nether stocks (stockings). 15. A kind of stiff, wide band or cravat for the neck; as, a silk stock. 16. A frame of timber, with holes in which the feet, or the feet and hands, of criminals were formerly confined by way of punishment. 17. Red and gray bricks, used for the exterior of walls and the front of buildings. 18. Any cruciferous plant of the genus Matthiola; as, common stock (Matthiola incana) (see Gilly-flower); ten-weeks stock (M. annua). 19. An irregular metalliferous mass filling a large cavity in a rock formation, as a stock of lead ore deposited in limestone. 20. In tectology, an aggregate or colony of persons (see Person), as trees, chains of salpae, etc. 21. A liquid or jelly containing the juices and soluble parts of meat, and certain vegetables, etc., extracted by cooking; -- used in making soup, gravy, etc.
Stoic (n.) A disciple of the philosopher Zeno; one of a Greek sect which held that men should be free from passion, unmoved by joy or grief, and should submit without complaint to unavoidable necessity, by which all things are governed. 2. Hence, a person not easily excited; an apathetic person; one who is apparently or professedly indifferent to pleasure or pain.
Stola (n.) A long garment, descending to the ankles, worn by Roman women.
Stole (n.) A long, loose garment reaching to the feet. 2. A narrow band of silk or stuff, sometimes enriched with embroidery and jewels, worn on the left shoulder of deacons, and across both shoulders of bishops and priests, pendent on each side nearly to the ground. At Mass, it is worn crossed on the breast by priests. It is used in various sacred functions.
Stoma (n.) The minute breathing pores of leaves or other organs opening into the intercellular spaces, and usually bordered by two contractile cells. 2. A stigma. See Stigma, n., 6 (a) & (b).
Stone (n.) Concreted earthy or mineral matter; also, any particular mass of such matter; as, a house built of stone; the boy threw a stone; pebbles are rounded stones. 2. A calculous concretion, especially one in the kidneys or bladder; the disease arising from a calculus. 3. The hard endocarp of drupes; as, the stone of a cherry or peach. See Illust. of Endocarp. 4. A weight which legally is fourteen pounds, but in practice varies with the article weighed. 5. Fig.: Symbol of hardness and insensibility; torpidness; insensibility; as, a heart of stone. 6. A stand or table with a smooth, flat top of stone, commonly marble, on which to arrange the pages of a book, newspaper, etc., before printing; -- called also imposing stone. 7. To pelt, beat, or kill with stones. 8. To free from stones; also, to remove the seeds of; as, to stone a field; to stone cherries; to stone raisins. 9. To wall or face with stones; to line or fortify with stones; as, to stone a well; to stone a cellar. 10. To rub, scour, or sharpen with a stone.
Stook (n.) A small collection of sheaves set up in the field; a shock; in England, twelve sheaves.
Stool (n.) A single seat with three or four legs and without a back, made in various forms for various uses. 2. A seat used in evacuating the bowels; hence, an evacuation; a discharge from the bowels. 3. A stool pigeon, or decoy bird. 4. A small channel on the side of a vessel, for the dead-eyes of the backstays. 5. A bench or form for resting the feet or the knees; a footstool; as, a kneeling stool. 6. Material, such as oyster shells, spread on the sea bottom for oyster spat to adhere to.
Stoop (n.) Originally, a covered porch with seats, at a house door; the Dutch stoep as introduced by the Dutch into New York. Afterward, an out-of-door flight of stairs of from seven to fourteen steps, with platform and parapets, leading to an entrance door some distance above the street; the French perron. Hence, any porch, platform, entrance stairway, or small veranda, at a house door. 2. The act of stooping, or bending the body forward; inclination forward; also, an habitual bend of the back and shoulders. 3. Descent, as from dignity or superiority; condescension; an act or position of humiliation.
Stork (n.) Any one of several species of large wading birds of the family Ciconidae, having long legs and a long, pointed bill. They are found both in the Old World and in America, and belong to Ciconia and several allied genera. The European white stork (Ciconia alba) is the best known. It commonly makes its nests on the top of a building, a chimney, a church spire, or a pillar. The black stork (C. nigra) is native of Asia, Africa, and Europe.
Storm (n.) A violent disturbance of the atmosphere, attended by wind, rain, snow, hail, or thunder and lightning; hence, often, a heavy fall of rain, snow, or hail, whether accompanied with wind or not. 2. A violent agitation of human society; a civil, political, or domestic commotion; sedition, insurrection, or war; violent outbreak; clamor; tumult. 3. A heavy shower or fall, any adverse outburst of tumultuous force; violence. 4. A violent assault on a fortified place; a furious attempt of troops to enter and take a fortified place by scaling the walls, forcing the gates, or the like.
Story (n.) The relation of an incident or minor event; a short narrative; a tale; especially, a fictitious narrative less elaborate than a novel; a short romance. 2. A euphemism or child's word for ""a lie;"" a fib; as, to tell a story.
Stoup (n.) A basin at the entrance of Roman Catholic churches for containing the holy water with which those who enter, dipping their fingers in it, cross themselves; -- called also holy-water stoup.
Stove (n.) A house or room artificially warmed or heated; a forcing house, or hothouse; a drying room; -- formerly, designating an artificially warmed dwelling or room, a parlor, or a bathroom, but now restricted, in this sense, to heated houses or rooms used for horticultural purposes or in the processes of the arts. 2. An apparatus, consisting essentially of a receptacle for fuel, made of iron, brick, stone, or tiles, and variously constructed, in which fire is made or kept for warming a room or a house, or for culinary or other purposes.
Strap (n.) A long, narrow, pliable strip of leather, cloth, or the like; specifically, a strip of thick leather used in flogging. 2. Something made of such a strip, or of a part of one, or a combination of two or more for a particular use; as, a boot strap, shawl strap, stirrup strap. 3. A piece of leather, or strip of wood covered with a suitable material, for sharpening a razor; a strop. 4. A narrow strip of anything, as of iron or brass. 5. A band, plate, or loop of metal for clasping and holding timbers or parts of a machine. 6. The flat part of the corolla in ligulate florets, as those of the white circle in the daisy. 7. The leaf, exclusive of its sheath, in some grasses.
Straw (n.) A stalk or stem of certain species of grain, pulse, etc., especially of wheat, rye, oats, barley, more rarely of buckwheat, beans, and pease. 2. The gathered and thrashed stalks of certain species of grain, etc.; as, a bundle, or a load, of rye straw.
Stray (n.) Any domestic animal that has an inclosure, or its proper place and company, and wanders at large, or is lost; an estray. Used also figuratively.
Stria (n.) A minute groove, or channel; a threadlike line, as of color; a narrow structural band or line; a striation; as, the striae, or groovings, produced on a rock by a glacier passing over it; the striae on the surface of a shell; a stria of nervous matter in the brain. 2. A fillet between the flutes of columns, pilasters, or the like.
Strid (n.) A narrow passage between precipitous rocks or banks, which looks as if it might be crossed at a stride.
Strip (n.) A narrow piece, or one comparatively long; as, a strip of cloth; a strip of land.
Strop (n.) A strap; specifically, same as Strap, 3. 2. A piece of rope spliced into a circular wreath, and put round a block for hanging it.
Strut (n.) In general, any piece of a frame which resists thrust or pressure in the direction of its own length. See Brace, and Illust. of Frame, and Roof. 2. Any part of a machine or structure, of which the principal function is to hold things apart; a brace subjected to compressive stress; -- the opposite of stay, and tie.
Stuff (n.) To fill by crowding something into; to cram with something; to load to excess; as, to stuff a bedtick. 2. To fill with a seasoning composition of bread, meat, condiments, etc.; as, to stuff a turkey. 3. To obstruct, as any of the organs; to affect with some obstruction in the organs of sense or respiration. 4. To fill the skin of, for the purpose of preserving as a specimen; -- said of birds or other animals. 5. To crowd with facts; to cram the mind of; sometimes, to crowd or fill with false or idle tales or fancies.
Stull (n.) A framework of timber covered with boards to support rubbish; also, a framework of boards to protect miners from falling stones.
Stulp (n.) A short, stout post used for any purpose, a to mark a boundary.
Stump (n.) The part of a limb or other body remaining after a part is amputated or destroyed; a fixed or rooted remnant; a stub; as, the stump of a leg, a finger, a tooth, or a broom. 2. The legs; as, to stir one's stumps. 3. A short, thick roll of leather or paper, cut to a point, or any similar implement, used to rub down the lines of a crayon or pencil drawing, in shading it, or for shading drawings by producing tints and gradations from crayon, etc., in powder. 4. A pin in a tumbler lock which forms an obstruction to throwing the bolt, except when the gates of the tumblers are properly arranged, as by the key; a fence; also, a pin or projection in a lock to form a guide for a movable piece. 5. To put (a batsman) out of play by knocking off the bail, or knocking down the stumps of the wicket he is defending while he is off his allotted ground; -- sometimes with out. 6. To bowl down the stumps of, as, of a wicket.
Stunt (n.) A check in growth; also, that which has been checked in growth; a stunted animal or thing. 2. Specifically: A whale two years old, which, having been weaned, is lean, and yields but little blubber.
Styan (n.) See Sty, a boil.
Styca (n.) An anglo-Saxon copper coin of the lowest value, being worth half a farthing.
Sucre (n.) A silver coin of Ecuador, worth 68 cents.
Sugar (n.) A sweet white (or brownish yellow) crystalline substance, of a sandy or granular consistency, obtained by crystallizing the evaporated juice of certain plants, as the sugar cane, sorghum, beet root, sugar maple, etc. It is used for seasoning and preserving many kinds of food and drink. Ordinary sugar is essentially sucrose. See the Note below. 2. By extension, anything resembling sugar in taste or appearance; as, sugar of lead (lead acetate), a poisonous white crystalline substance having a sweet taste.
Suint (n.) A peculiar substance obtained from the wool of sheep, consisting largely of potash mixed with fatty and earthy matters. It is used as a source of potash and also for the manufacture of gas.
Suite (n.) A retinue or company of attendants, as of a distinguished personage; as, the suite of an ambassador. See Suit, n., 5. 2. A connected series or succession of objects; a number of things used or clessed together; a set; as, a suite of rooms; a suite of minerals. See Suit, n., 6. 3. One of the old musical forms, before the time of the more compact sonata, consisting of a string or series of pieces all in the same key, mostly in various dance rhythms, with sometimes an elaborate prelude. Some composers of the present day affect the suite form.
Sulks (n. pl.) The condition of being sulky; a sulky mood or humor; as, to be in the sulks.
Super (n.) A contraction of Supernumerary, in sense 2.
Surge (n.) A large wave or billow; a great, rolling swell of water, produced generally by a high wind. 2. The motion of, or produced by, a great wave. 3. The tapered part of a windlass barrel or a capstan, upon which the cable surges, or slips. 4. To let go or slacken suddenly, as a rope; as, to surge a hawser or messenger; also, to slacken the rope about (a capstan).
Sutra (n.) A body of Hindoo literature containing aphorisms on grammar, meter, law, and philosophy, and forming a connecting link between the Vedic and later Sanscrit literature.
Swage (n.) A tool, variously shaped or grooved on the end or face, used by blacksmiths and other workers in metals, for shaping their work, whether sheet metal or forging, by holding the swage upon the work, or the work upon the swage, and striking with a sledge.
Swain (n.) A young man dwelling in the country; a rustic; esp., a cuntry gallant or lover; -- chiefly in poetry.
Swale (n.) A valley or low place; a tract of low, and usually wet, land; a moor; a fen.
Swamp (n.) Wet, spongy land; soft, low ground saturated with water, but not usually covered with it; marshy ground away from the seashore.
Swape (n.) See Sweep, n., 12.
Swarm (n.) A large number or mass of small animals or insects, especially when in motion. 2. Especially, a great number of honeybees which emigrate from a hive at once, and seek new lodgings under the direction of a queen; a like body of bees settled permanently in a hive. 3. Hence, any great number or multitude, as of people in motion, or sometimes of inanimate objects; as, a swarm of meteorites.
Swash (n.) A narrow sound or channel of water lying within a sand bank, or between a sand bank and the shore, or a bar over which the sea washes.
Sweep (n.) The compass or range of a stroke; as, a long sweep. 2. The compass of any turning body or of any motion; as, the sweep of a door; the sweep of the eye. 3. The compass of anything flowing or brushing; as, the flood carried away everything within its sweep. 4. Violent and general destruction; as, the sweep of an epidemic disease. 5. Direction and extent of any motion not rectlinear; as, the sweep of a compass. 6. Direction or departure of a curve, a road, an arch, or the like, away from a rectlinear line. 7. One who sweeps; a sweeper; specifically, a chimney sweeper. 8. A movable templet for making molds, in loam molding. 9. A large oar used in small vessels, partly to propel them and partly to steer them. 10. A long pole, or piece of timber, moved on a horizontal fulcrum fixed to a tall post and used to raise and lower a bucket in a well for drawing water. 11. In the game of casino, a pairing or combining of all the cards on the board, and so removing them all; in whist, the winning of all the tricks (thirteen) in a hand; a slam. 12. The sweeping of workshops where precious metals are worked, containing filings, etc.
Sweet (n.) Confectionery, sweetmeats, preserves, etc. 2. Home-made wines, cordials, metheglin, etc. 3. That which is pleasing or grateful to the mind; as, the sweets of domestic life.
Swell (n.) Increase of force, intensity, or volume of sound. 2. Increase of power in style, or of rhetorical force. 3. A gradual ascent, or rounded elevation, of land; as, an extensive plain abounding with little swells. 4. A wave, or billow; especially, a succession of large waves; the roll of the sea after a storm; as, a heavy swell sets into the harbor. 5. A showy, dashing person; a dandy.
Swerd (n. & v.) See Sward, n. & v.
Swift (n.) Any one of numerous species of small, long-winged, insectivorous birds of the family Micropodidae. In form and habits the swifts resemble swallows, but they are destitute of complex vocal muscles and are not singing birds, but belong to a widely different group allied to the humming birds. 2. Any one of several species of lizards, as the pine lizard. 3. A reel, or turning instrument, for winding yarn, thread, etc.; -- used chiefly in the plural.
Swill (n.) The wash, or mixture of liquid substances, given to swine; hogwash; -- called also swillings.
Swine (n.) Any animal of the hog kind, especially one of the domestical species. Swine secrete a large amount of subcutaneous fat, which, when extracted, is known as lard. The male is specifically called boar, the female, sow, and the young, pig. See Hog.
Swing (n.) To turn round by action of wind or tide when at anchor; as, a ship swings with the tide. 2. The act of swinging; a waving, oscillating, or vibratory motion of a hanging or pivoted object; oscillation; as, the swing of a pendulum. 3. Swaying motion from one side or direction to the other; as, some men walk with a swing. 4. A line, cord, or other thing suspended and hanging loose, upon which anything may swing; especially, an apparatus for recreation by swinging, commonly consisting of a rope, the two ends of which are attached overhead, as to the bough of a tree, a seat being placed in the loop at the bottom; also, any contrivance by which a similar motion is produced for amusement or exercise. 5. Capacity of a turning lathe, as determined by the diameter of the largest object that can be turned in it.
Swipe (n.) A strong blow given with a sweeping motion, as with a bat or club. 2. Poor, weak beer; small beer.
Swirl (n.) To whirl, or cause to whirl, as in an eddy. 2. A whirling motion; an eddy, as of water; a whirl.
Swish (n.) A sound of quick movement, as of something whirled through the air.
Swoop (n.) To fall on at once and seize; to catch while on the wing; as, a hawk swoops a chicken. 2. A falling on and seizing, as the prey of a rapacious bird; the act of swooping.
Sword (n.) An offensive weapon, having a long and usually sharp/pointed blade with a cutting edge or edges. It is the general term, including the small sword, rapier, saber, scimiter, and many other varieties. 2. Hence, the emblem of judicial vengeance or punishment, or of authority and power. 3. Destruction by the sword, or in battle; war; dissension.
Sycee (n.) Silver, pounded into ingots of the shape of a shoe, and used as currency. The most common weight is about one pound troy.
Sylph (n.) Fig.: A slender, graceful woman. 2. Any one of several species of very brilliant South American humming birds, having a very long and deeply-forked tail; as, the blue-tailed sylph (Cynanthus cyanurus).
Syrma (n.) A long dress, trailing on the floor, worn by tragic actors in Greek and Roman theaters.
Tabby (n.) A kind of waved silk, usually called watered silk, manufactured like taffeta, but thicker and stronger. The watering is given to it by calendering. 2. A mixture of lime with shells, gravel, or stones, in equal proportions, with an equal proportion of water. When dry, this becomes as hard as rock. 3. A brindled cat; hence, popularly, any cat.
Tabes (n.) Progressive emaciation of the body, accompained with hectic fever, with no well-marked logical symptoms.
Table (n.) A smooth, flat surface, like the side of a board; a thin, flat, smooth piece of anything; a slab. 2. A thin, flat piece of wood, stone, metal, or other material, on which anything is cut, traced, written, or painted; a tablet 3. Any smooth, flat surface upon which an inscription, a drawing, or the like, may be produced. 4. Hence, in a great variety of applications: A condensed statement which may be comprehended by the eye in a single view; a methodical or systematic synopsis; the presentation of many items or particulars in one group; a scheme; a schedule. 5. A view of the contents of a work; a statement of the principal topics discussed; an index; a syllabus; a synopsis; as, a table of contents. 6. A list of substances and their properties; especially, a list of the elementary substances with their atomic weights, densities, symbols, etc. 7. Any collection and arrangement in a condensed form of many particulars or values, for ready reference, as of weights, measures, currency, specific gravities, etc.; also, a series of numbers following some law, and expressing particular values corresponding to certain other numbers on which they depend, and by means of which they are taken out for use in computations; as, tables of logarithms, sines, tangents, squares, cubes, etc.; annuity tables; interest tables; astronomical tables, etc. 8. An article of furniture, consisting of a flat slab, board, or the like, having a smooth surface, fixed horizontally on legs, and used for a great variety of purposes, as in eating, writing, or working. 9. Hence, food placed on a table to be partaken of; fare; entertainment; as, to set a good table. 10. One of the two, external and internal, layers of compact bone, separated by diploe, in the walls of the cranium. 11. A stringcourse which includes an offset; esp., a band of stone, or the like, set where an offset is required, so as to make it decorative. See Water table. 12. One of the divisions of a backgammon board; as, to play into the right-hand table. 13. The upper flat surface of a diamond or other precious stone, the sides of which are cut in angles. 14. A plane surface, supposed to be transparent and perpendicular to the horizon; -- called also perspective plane.
Taboo (n.) A total prohibition of intercourse with, use of, or approach to, a given person or thing under pain of death, -- an interdict of religious origin and authority, formerly common in the islands of Polynesia; interdiction.
Tabor (n.) A small drum used as an accompaniment to a pipe or fife, both being played by the same person.
Tache (n.) A spot, stain, or blemish.
Taint (n.) A thrust with a lance, which fails of its intended effect. 2. An injury done to a lance in an encounter, without its being broken; also, a breaking of a lance in an encounter in a dishonorable or unscientific manner.
Tales (n.) Persons added to a jury, commonly from those in or about the courthouse, to make up any deficiency in the number of jurors regularly summoned, being like, or such as, the latter.
Tally (n.) Originally, a piece of wood on which notches or scores were cut, as the marks of number; later, one of two books, sheets of paper, etc., on which corresponding accounts were kept. 2. Hence, any account or score kept by notches or marks, whether on wood or paper, or in a book; especially, one kept in duplicate. 3. A notch, mark, or score made on or in a tally; as, to make or earn a tally in a game. 4. A tally shop. See Tally shop, below. 5. To score with correspondent notches; hence, to make to correspond; to cause to fit or suit. 6. To check off, as parcels of freight going inboard or outboard.
Talma (n.) A kind of large cape, or short, full cloak, forming part of the dress of ladies.
Talon (n.) The claw of a predaceous bird or animal, especially the claw of a bird of prey. 2. A kind of molding, concave at the bottom and convex at the top; -- usually called an ogee.
Taluk (n.) A large estate; esp., one constituting a revenue district or dependency the native proprietor of which is responsible for the collection and payment of the public revenue due from it.
Tamil (n.) The Tamil language, the most important of the Dravidian languages. See Dravidian, a.
Tamis (n.) A sieve, or strainer, made of a kind of woolen cloth.
Tammy (n.) A kind of woolen, or woolen and cotton, cloth, often highly glazed, -- used for curtains, sieves, strainers, etc. 2. A sieve, or strainer, made of this material; a tamis.
Tansy (n.) Any plant of the composite genus Tanacetum. The common tansy (T. vulgare) has finely divided leaves, a strong aromatic odor, and a very bitter taste. It is used for medicinal and culinary purposes. 2. A dish common in the seventeenth century, made of eggs, sugar, rose water, cream, and the juice of herbs, baked with butter in a shallow dish.
Taper (n.) A small wax candle; a small lighted wax candle; hence, a small light. 2. A tapering form; gradual diminution of thickness in an elongated object; as, the taper of a spire.
Tapir (n.) Any one of several species of large odd-toed ungulates belonging to Tapirus, Elasmognathus, and allied genera. They have a long prehensile upper lip, short ears, short and stout legs, a short, thick tail, and short, close hair. They have three toes on the hind feet, and four toes on the fore feet, but the outermost toe is of little use.
Tapis (n.) Tapestry; formerly, the cover of a council table.
Tarry (n.) Consisting of, or covered with, tar; like tar.
Tasse (n.) A piece of armor for the thighs, forming an appendage to the ancient corselet.
Taste (n.) A particular sensation excited by the application of a substance to the tongue; the quality or savor of any substance as perceived by means of the tongue; flavor; as, the taste of an orange or an apple; a bitter taste; an acid taste; a sweet taste. 2. The one of the five senses by which certain properties of bodies (called their taste, savor, flavor) are ascertained by contact with the organs of taste. 3. Intellectual relish; liking; fondness; -- formerly with of, now with for; as, he had no taste for study. 4. The power of perceiving and relishing excellence in human performances; the faculty of discerning beauty, order, congruity, proportion, symmetry, or whatever constitutes excellence, particularly in the fine arts and belles-letters; critical judgment; discernment. 5. Manner, with respect to what is pleasing, refined, or in accordance with good usage; style; as, music composed in good taste; an epitaph in bad taste.
Tasty (n.) Being in conformity to the principles of good taste; elegant; as, tasty furniture; a tasty dress.
Tatch (n.) A spot or stain; also, a trick.
Tatou (n.) The giant armadillo (Priodontes gigas) of tropical South America. It becomes nearly five feet long including the tail. It is noted for its burrowing powers, feeds largely upon dead animals, and sometimes invades human graves.
Tatta (n.) A bamboo frame or trellis hung at a door or window of a house, over which water is suffered to trickle, in order to moisten and cool the air as it enters.
Tawny (n.) Of a dull yellowish brown color, like things tanned, or persons who are sunburnt; as, tawny Moor or Spaniard; the tawny lion.
Taxer (n.) One of two officers chosen yearly to regulate the assize of bread, and to see the true gauge of weights and measures is observed.
Taxis (n.) Manipulation applied to a hernial tumor, or to an intestinal obstruction, for the purpose of reducing it.
Taxor (n.) Same as Taxer, n., 2.
Tayra (n.) A South American carnivore (Galera barbara) allied to the grison. The tail is long and thick. The length, including the tail, is about three feet.
Tazza (n.) An ornamental cup or vase with a large, flat, shallow bowl, resting on a pedestal and often having handles.
Tedge (n.) The gate of a mold, through which the melted metal is poured; runner, geat.
Teens (n. pl.) The years of one's age having the termination -teen, beginning with thirteen and ending with nineteen; as, a girl in her teens.
Teest (n.) A tinsmith's stake, or small anvil.
Teint (n.) Tint; color; tinge, See Tint.
Tench (n.) A European fresh-water fish (Tinca tinca, or T. vulgaris) allied to the carp. It is noted for its tenacity of life.
Tenet (n.) Any opinion, principle, dogma, belief, or doctrine, which a person holds or maintains as true; as, the tenets of Plato or of Cicero.
Tenne (n.) A tincture, rarely employed, which is considered as an orange color or bright brown. It is represented by diagonal lines from sinister to dexter, crossed by vertical lines.
Tenon (n.) A projecting member left by cutting away the wood around it, and made to insert into a mortise, and in this way secure together the parts of a frame; especially, such a member when it passes entirely through the thickness of the piece in which the mortise is cut, and shows on the other side. Cf. Tooth, Tusk.
Tenor (n.) An exact copy of a writing, set forth in the words and figures of it. It differs from purport, which is only the substance or general import of the instrument. 2. The higher of the two kinds of voices usually belonging to adult males; hence, the part in the harmony adapted to this voice; the second of the four parts in the scale of sounds, reckoning from the base, and originally the air, to which the other parts were auxillary. 3. A person who sings the tenor, or the instrument that play it.
Tense (n.) One of the forms which a verb takes by inflection or by adding auxiliary words, so as to indicate the time of the action or event signified; the modification which verbs undergo for the indication of time.
Tenth (n.) The tenth part of annual produce, income, increase, or the like; a tithe. 2. The interval between any tone and the tone represented on the tenth degree of the staff above it, as between one of the scale and three of the octave above; the octave of the third. 3. A temporary aid issuing out of personal property, and granted to the king by Parliament; formerly, the real tenth part of all the movables belonging to the subject. 4. The tenth part of the annual profit of every living in the kingdom, formerly paid to the pope, but afterward transferred to the crown. It now forms a part of the fund called Queen Anne's Bounty.
Terin (n.) A small yellow singing bird, with an ash-colored head; the European siskin. Called also tarin.
Terma (n.) The terminal lamina, or thin ventral part, of the anterior wall of the third ventricle of the brain.
Terry (n.) A kind of heavy colored fabric, either all silk, or silk and worsted, or silk and cotton, often called terry velvet, used for upholstery and trimmings.
Testa (n.) The outer integument of a seed; the episperm, or spermoderm.
Teste (n.) The witnessing or concluding clause, duty attached; -- said of a writ, deed, or the like.
Tetel (n.) A large African antelope (Alcelaphus tora). It has widely divergent, strongly ringed horns.
Tewel (n.) A pipe, funnel, or chimney, as for smoke.
Texas (n.) A structure on the hurricane deck of a steamer, containing the pilot house, officers' cabins, etc.
Thane (n.) A dignitary under the Anglo-Saxons and Danes in England. Of these there were two orders, the king's thanes, who attended the kings in their courts and held lands immediately of them, and the ordinary thanes, who were lords of manors and who had particular jurisdiction within their limits. After the Conquest, this title was disused, and baron took its place.
Thank (n.) A expression of gratitude; an acknowledgment expressive of a sense of favor or kindness received; obligation, claim, or desert, or gratitude; -- now generally used in the plural.
Theca (n.) A sheath; a case; as, the theca, or cell, of an anther; the theca, or spore case, of a fungus; the theca of the spinal cord.
Theft (n.) The act of stealing; specifically, the felonious taking and removing of personal property, with an intent to deprive the rightful owner of the same; larceny.
Theme (n.) A noun or verb, not modified by inflections; also, that part of a noun or verb which remains unchanged (except by euphonic variations) in declension or conjugation; stem.
Theta (n.) A letter of the Greek alphabet corresponding to th in English; -- sometimes called the unlucky letter, from being used by the judges on their ballots in passing condemnation on a prisoner, it being the first letter of the Greek qa`natos, death.
Thick (n.) The thickest part, or the time when anything is thickest. 2. A thicket; as, gloomy thicks.
Thigh (n.) The coxa, or femur, of an insect.
Thill (n.) One of the two long pieces of wood, extending before a vehicle, between which a horse is hitched; a shaft.
Thing (n.) Whatever exists, or is conceived to exist, as a separate entity, whether animate or inanimate; any separable or distinguishable object of thought. 2. An inanimate object, in distinction from a living being; any lifeless material. 3. Clothes; furniture; appurtenances; luggage; as, to pack or store one's things. 4. In Scandinavian countries, a legislative or judicial assembly.
Third (n.) The third part of the estate of a deceased husband, which, by some local laws, the widow is entitled to enjoy during her life.
Thole (n.) A wooden or metal pin, set in the gunwale of a boat, to serve as a fulcrum for the oar in rowing. 2. The pin, or handle, of a scythe snath.
Thong (n.) A strap of leather; especially, one used for fastening anything.
Thorn (n.) A hard and sharp-pointed projection from a woody stem; usually, a branch so transformed; a spine. 2. Any shrub or small tree which bears thorns; especially, any species of the genus Crataegus, as the hawthorn, whitethorn, cockspur thorn. 3. The name of the Anglo-Saxon letter /, capital form /. It was used to represent both of the sounds of English th, as in thin, then. So called because it was the initial letter of thorn, a spine.
Thoth (n.) The god of eloquence and letters among the ancient Egyptians, and supposed to be the inventor of writing and philosophy. He corresponded to the Mercury of the Romans, and was usually represented as a human figure with the head of an ibis or a lamb.
Three (n.) A symbol representing three units, as 3 or iii.
Throb (n.) A beat, or strong pulsation, as of the heart and arteries; a violent beating; a papitation:
Throe (n.) Extreme pain; violent pang; anguish; agony; especially, one of the pangs of travail in childbirth, or purturition.
Throw (n.) Pain; especially, pain of travail; throe. 2. The distance which a missile is, or may be, thrown; as, a stone's throw. 3. A cast of dice; the manner in which dice fall when cast; as, a good throw. 4. The extreme movement given to a sliding or vibrating reciprocating piece by a cam, crank, eccentric, or the like; travel; stroke; as, the throw of a slide valve. Also, frequently, the length of the radius of a crank, or the eccentricity of an eccentric; as, the throw of the crank of a steam engine is equal to half the stroke of the piston. 5. A potter's wheel or table; a jigger. See 2d Jigger, 2 (a). 6. The amount of vertical displacement produced by a fault; -- according to the direction it is designated as an upthrow, or a downthrow.
Thrum (n.) One of the ends of weaver's threads; hence, any soft, short threads or tufts resembling these.
Thuja (n.) A genus of evergreen trees, thickly branched, remarkable for the distichous arrangement of their branches, and having scalelike, closely imbricated, or compressed leaves.
Thule (n.) The name given by ancient geographers to the northernmost part of the habitable world. According to some, this land was Norway, according to others, Iceland, or more probably Mainland, the largest of the Shetland islands; hence, the Latin phrase ultima Thule, farthest Thule.
Thumb (n.) The short, thick first digit of the human hand, differing from the other fingers in having but two phalanges; the pollex. See Pollex.
Thump (n.) The sound made by the sudden fall or blow of a heavy body, as of a hammer, or the like. 2. A blow or knock, as with something blunt or heavy; a heavy fall.
Thyme (n.) Any plant of the labiate genus Thymus. The garden thyme (Thymus vulgaris) is a warm, pungent aromatic, much used to give a relish to seasoning and soups.
Tiara (n.) A form of headdress worn by the ancient Persians. According to Xenophon, the royal tiara was encircled with a diadem, and was high and erect, while those of the people were flexible, or had rims turned over. 2. The pope's triple crown. It was at first a round, high cap, but was afterward encompassed with a crown, subsequently with a second, and finally with a third. Fig.: The papal dignity.
Tibia (n.) The inner, or preaxial, and usually the larger, of the two bones of the leg or hind limb below the knee. 2. The fourth joint of the leg of an insect. See Illust. under Coleoptera, and under Hexapoda. 3. A musical instrument of the flute kind, originally made of the leg bone of an animal.
Tical (n.) A bean-shaped coin of Siam, worth about sixty cents; also, a weight equal to 236 grains troy. 2. A money of account in China, reckoning at about $1.60; also, a weight of about four ounces avoirdupois.
Tiger (n.) A very large and powerful carnivore (Felis tigris) native of Southern Asia and the East Indies. Its back and sides are tawny or rufous yellow, transversely striped with black, the tail is ringed with black, the throat and belly are nearly white. When full grown, it equals or exceeds the lion in size and strength. Called also royal tiger, and Bengal tiger. 2. Fig.: A ferocious, bloodthirsty person. 3. A servant in livery, who rides with his master or mistress. 4. A kind of growl or screech, after cheering; as, three cheers and a tiger.
Tilde (n.) The accentual mark placed over n, and sometimes over l, in Spanish words [thus, ?, /], indicating that, in pronunciation, the sound of the following vowel is to be preceded by that of the initial, or consonantal, y.
Tilth (n.) The state of being tilled, or prepared for a crop; culture; as, land is good tilth.
Timer (n.) A timekeeper; especially, a watch by which small intervals of time can be measured; a kind of stop watch. It is used for timing the speed of horses, machinery, etc.
Tinea (n.) A name applied to various skin diseases, but especially to ringworm. See Ringworm, and Sycosis. 2. A genus of small Lepidoptera, including the clothes moths and carpet moths.
Tinge (n.) A degree, usually a slight degree, of some color, taste, or something foreign, infused into another substance or mixture, or added to it; tincture; color; dye; hue; shade; taste.
Tinto (n.) A red Madeira wine, wanting the high aroma of the white sorts, and, when old, resembling tawny port.
Tisri (n.) The seventh month of the Jewish ecclesiastical year, answering to a part of September with a part of October.
Tithe (n.) A tenth; the tenth part of anything; specifically, the tenthpart of the increase arising from the profits of land and stock, allotted to the clergy for their support, as in England, or devoted to religious or charitable uses. Almost all the tithes of England and Wales are commuted by law into rent charges. 2. Hence, a small part or proportion.
Title (n.) The inscription in the beginning of a book, usually containing the subject of the work, the author's and publisher's names, the date, etc. 2. The panel for the name, between the bands of the back of a book. 3. A section or division of a subject, as of a law, a book, specif. (Roman & Canon Laws), a chapter or division of a law book. 4. An appellation of dignity, distinction, or preeminence (hereditary or acquired), given to persons, as duke marquis, honorable, esquire, etc. 5. That which constitutes a just cause of exclusive possession; that which is the foundation of ownership of property, real or personal; a right; as, a good title to an estate, or an imperfect title. 6. A church to which a priest was ordained, and where he was to reside.
Toady (n.) A coarse, rustic woman.
Toddy (n.) A juice drawn from various kinds of palms in the East Indies; or, a spirituous liquor procured from it by fermentation.
Tofus (n.) Tufa. See under Tufa, and Toph.
Token (n.) Something intended or supposed to represent or indicate another thing or an event; a sign; a symbol; as, the rainbow is a token of God's covenant established with Noah. 2. Something given or shown as a symbol or guarantee of authority or right; a sign of authenticity, of power, good faith, etc. 3. A piece of metal intended for currency, and issued by a private party, usually bearing the name of the issuer, and redeemable in lawful money. Also, a coin issued by government, esp. when its use as lawful money is limited and its intrinsic value is much below its nominal value. 4. A livid spot upon the body, indicating, or supposed to indicate, the approach of death. 5. Ten and a half quires, or, commonly, 250 sheets, of paper printed on both sides; also, in some cases, the same number of sheets printed on one side, or half the number printed on both sides.
Tolyl (n.) The hydrocarbon radical, CH3.C6H4, regarded as characteristic of certain compounds of the aromatic series related to toluene; as, tolyl carbinol.
Toman (n.) A money of account in Persia, whose value varies greatly at different times and places. Its average value may be reckoned at about two and a half dollars.
Tommy (n.) Bread, -- generally a penny roll; the supply of food carried by workmen as their daily allowance. 2. A truck, or barter; the exchange of labor for goods, not money.
Tonga (n.) A drug useful in neuralgia, derived from a Fijian plant supposed to be of the aroid genus Epipremnum.
Tongs (n. pl.) An instrument, usually of metal, consisting of two parts, or long shafts, jointed together at or near one end, or united by an elastic bow, used for handling things, especially hot coals or metals; -- often called a pair of tongs.
Tonic (n.) The key tone, or first tone of any scale. 2. A medicine that increases the strength, and gives vigor of action to the system.
Tonus (n.) Tonicity, or tone; as, muscular tonus.
Tooth (n.) One of the hard, bony appendages which are borne on the jaws, or on other bones in the walls of the mouth or pharynx of most vertebrates, and which usually aid in the prehension and mastication of food. 2. Any projection corresponding to the tooth of an animal, in shape, position, or office; as, the teeth, or cogs, of a cogwheel; a tooth, prong, or tine, of a fork; a tooth, or the teeth, of a rake, a saw, a file, a card. 3. A projecting member resembling a tenon, but fitting into a mortise that is only sunk, not pierced through. 4. One of several steps, or offsets, in a tusk. See Tusk. 5. An angular or prominence on any edge; as, a tooth on the scale of a fish, or on a leaf of a plant 6. Any hard calcareous or chitinous organ found in the mouth of various invertebrates and used in feeding or procuring food; as, the teeth of a mollusk or a starfish.
Topaz (n.) A mineral occurring in rhombic prisms, generally yellowish and pellucid, also colorless, and of greenesh, bluish, or brownish shades. It sometimes occurs massive and opaque. It is a fluosilicate of alumina, and is used as a gem. 2. Either one of two species of large, brilliantly colored humming birds of the Topaza, of South America and the West Indies.
Toper (n.) One who topes, or drinks frequently or to excess; a drunkard; a sot.
Topic (n.) One of the various general forms of argument employed in probable as distinguished from demonstrative reasoning, -- denominated by Aristotle to`poi (literally, places), as being the places or sources from which arguments may be derived, or to which they may be referred; also, a prepared form of argument, applicable to a great variety of cases, with a supply of which the ancient rhetoricians and orators provided themselves; a commonplace of argument or oratory. 2. A treatise on forms of argument; a system or scheme of forms or commonplaces of argument or oratory; as, the Topics of Aristotle. 3. The subject of any distinct portion of a discourse, or argument, or literary composition; also, the general or main subject of the whole; a matter treated of; a subject, as of conversation or of thought; a matter; a point; a head. 4. An external local application or remedy, as a plaster, a blister, etc.
Toque (n.) A kind of cap worn in the 16th century, and copied in modern fashions; -- called also toquet.
Torch (n.) A light or luminary formed of some combustible substance, as of resinous wood; a large candle or flambeau, or a lamp giving a large, flaring flame.
Toret (n.) A ring for fastening a hawk's leash to the jesses; also, a ring affixed to the collar of a dog, etc.
Torso (n.) The human body, as distinguished from the head and limbs; in sculpture, the trunk of a statue, mutilated of head and limbs; as, the torso of Hercules.
Torta (n.) a flat heap of moist, crushed silver ore, prepared for the patio process.
Torus (n.) The receptacle, or part of the flower on which the carpels stand. 2. See 3d Tore, 2.
Total (n.) The whole; the whole sum or amount; as, these sums added make the grand total of five millions.
Totem (n.) A rude picture, as of a bird, beast, or the like, used by the North American Indians as a symbolic designation, as of a family or a clan.
Toter (n.) The stone roller. See Stone roller (a), under Stone.
Tourn (n.) The sheriff's turn, or court.
Towel (n.) A cloth used for wiping, especially one used for drying anything wet, as the person after a bath.
Tower (n.) A mass of building standing alone and insulated, usually higher than its diameter, but when of great size not always of that proportion. 2. A projection from a line of wall, as a fortification, for purposes of defense, as a flanker, either or the same height as the curtain wall or higher. 3. A structure appended to a larger edifice for a special purpose, as for a belfry, and then usually high in proportion to its width and to the height of the rest of the edifice; as, a church tower. 4. A citadel; a fortress; hence, a defense. 5. A headdress of a high or towerlike form, fashionable about the end of the seventeenth century and until 1715; also, any high headdress.
Trace (n.) One of two straps, chains, or ropes of a harness, extending from the collar or breastplate to a whiffletree attached to a vehicle or thing to be drawn; a tug.
Track (n.) A mark left by something that has passed along; as, the track, or wake, of a ship; the track of a meteor; the track of a sled or a wheel. 2. A mark or impression left by the foot, either of man or beast; trace; vestige; footprint. 3. The entire lower surface of the foot; -- said of birds, etc. 4. Course; way; as, the track of a comet. 5. A path or course laid out for a race, for exercise, etc. 6. A tract or area, as of land.
Tract (n.) A written discourse or dissertation, generally of short extent; a short treatise, especially on practical religion.
Trail (n.) A track left by man or beast; a track followed by the hunter; a scent on the ground by the animal pursued; as, a deer trail. 2. A footpath or road track through a wilderness or wild region; as, an Indian trail over the plains. 3. Anything drawn out to a length; as, the trail of a meteor; a trail of smoke. 4. Anything drawn along, as a vehicle. 5. The entrails of a fowl, especially of game, as the woodcock, and the like; -- applied also, sometimes, to the entrails of sheep. 6. That part of the stock of a gun carriage which rests on the ground when the piece is unlimbered. See Illust. of Gun carriage, under Gun.
Tramp (n.) A foot journey or excursion; as, to go on a tramp; a long tramp. 2. The sound of the foot, or of feet, on the earth, as in marching. 3. A plate of iron worn to protect the sole of the foot, or the shoe, when digging with a spade.
Traps (n. pl.) Small or portable articles for dress, furniture, or use; goods; luggage; things.
Trash (n.) Especially, loppings and leaves of trees, bruised sugar cane, or the like. 2. A collar, leash, or halter used to restrain a dog in pursuing game.
Trass (n.) A white to gray volcanic tufa, formed of decomposed trachytic cinders; -- sometimes used as a cement. Hence, a coarse sort of plaster or mortar, durable in water, and used to line cisterns and other reservoirs of water.
Trawl (n.) A fishing line, often extending a mile or more, having many short lines bearing hooks attached to it. It is used for catching cod, halibut, etc.; a boulter. 2. A large bag net attached to a beam with iron frames at its ends, and dragged at the bottom of the sea, -- used in fishing, and in gathering forms of marine life from the sea bottom.
Tread (n.) A step or stepping; pressure with the foot; a footstep; as, a nimble tread; a cautious tread. 2. Manner or style of stepping; action; gait; as, the horse has a good tread. 3. The upper horizontal part of a step, on which the foot is placed. 4. The top of the banquette, on which soldiers stand to fire over the parapet. 5. A bruise or abrasion produced on the foot or ankle of a horse that interferes. See Interfere, 3.
Treat (n.) That which affords entertainment; a gratification; a satisfaction; as, the concert was a rich treat.
Trend (n.) Inclination in a particular direction; tendency; general direction; as, the trend of a coast.
Tress (n.) A braid, knot, or curl, of hair; a ringlet. 2. Fig.: A knot or festoon, as of flowers.
Trews (n. pl.) Trowsers; especially, those of the Scotch Highlanders.
Triad (n.) A union of three; three objects treated as one; a ternary; a trinity; as, a triad of deities. 2. The common chord, consisting of a tone with its third and fifth, with or without the octave.
Trial (n.) Examination by a test; experiment, as in chemistry, metallurgy, etc. 2. The state of being tried or tempted; exposure to suffering that tests strength, patience, faith, or the like; affliction or temptation that exercises and proves the graces or virtues of men. 3. That which tries or afflicts; that which harasses; that which tries the character or principles; that which tempts to evil; as, his child's conduct was a sore trial. 4. The formal examination of the matter in issue in a cause before a competent tribunal; the mode of determining a question of fact in a court of law; the examination, in legal form, of the facts in issue in a cause pending before a competent tribunal, for the purpose of determining such issue.
Trias (n.) The formation situated between the Permian and Lias, and so named by the Germans, because consisting of three series of strata, which are called in German the Bunter sandstein, Muschelkalk, and Keuper.
Tribe (n.) A family, race, or series of generations, descending from the same progenitor, and kept distinct, as in the case of the twelve tribes of Israel, descended from the twelve sons of Jacob. 2. A number of species or genera having certain structural characteristics in common; as, a tribe of plants; a tribe of animals. 3. A nation of savages or uncivilized people; a body of rude people united under one leader or government; as, the tribes of the Six Nations; the Seneca tribe. 4. A division, class, or distinct portion of a people, from whatever cause that distinction may have originated; as, the city of Athens was divided into ten tribes. 5. A family of animals descended from some particular female progenitor, through the female line; as, the Duchess tribe of shorthorns.
Trica (n.) An apothecium in certain lichens, having a spherical surface marked with spiral or concentric ridges and furrows.
Trill (n.) A sound, of consonantal character, made with a rapid succession of partial or entire intermissions, by the vibration of some one part of the organs in the mouth -- tongue, uvula, epiglottis, or lip -- against another part; as, the r is a trill in most languages. 2. The action of the organs in producing such sounds; as, to give a trill to the tongue. d 3. A shake or quaver of the voice in singing, or of the sound of an instrument, produced by the rapid alternation of two contiguous tones of the scale; as, to give a trill on the high C. See Shake.
Trine (n.) The aspect of planets distant from each other 120 degrees, or one third of the zodiac; trigon.
Trior (n.) Same as Trier, 2 and 3.
Tripe (n.) The large stomach of ruminating animals, when prepared for food. 2. The entrails; hence, humorously or in contempt, the belly; -- generally used in the plural.
Trist (n.) A post, or station, in hunting. 2. A secret meeting, or the place of such meeting; a tryst. See Tryst.
Troll (n.) A supernatural being, often represented as of diminutive size, but sometimes as a giant, and fabled to inhabit caves, hills, and like places; a witch.
Tromp (n.) A blowing apparatus, in which air, drawn into the upper part of a vertical tube through side holes by a stream of water within, is carried down with the water into a box or chamber below which it is led to a furnace.
Trona (n.) A native double salt, consisting of a combination of neutral and acid sodium carbonate, Na2CO3.2HNaCO3.2H2O, occurring as a white crystalline fibrous deposit from certain soda brine springs and lakes; -- called also urao, and by the ancients nitrum.
Troop (n.) Soldiers, collectively; an army; -- now generally used in the plural. 2. Specifically, a small body of cavalry, light horse, or dragoons, consisting usually of about sixty men, commanded by a captain; the unit of formation of cavalry, corresponding to the company in infantry. Formerly, also, a company of horse artillery; a battery.
Trope (n.) The use of a word or expression in a different sense from that which properly belongs to it; the use of a word or expression as changed from the original signification to another, for the sake of giving life or emphasis to an idea; a figure of speech.
Troth (n.) Truth; verity; veracity; as, by my troth.
Trout (n.) Any one of numerous species of fishes belonging to Salmo, Salvelinus, and allied genera of the family Salmonidae. They are highly esteemed as game fishes and for the quality of their flesh. All the species breed in fresh water, but after spawning many of them descend to the sea if they have an opportunity. 2. Any one of several species of marine fishes more or less resembling a trout in appearance or habits, but not belonging to the same family, especially the California rock trouts, the common squeteague, and the southern, or spotted, squeteague; -- called also salt-water trout, sea trout, shad trout, and gray trout. See Squeteague, and Rock trout under Rock.
Truce (n.) A suspension of arms by agreement of the commanders of opposing forces; a temporary cessation of hostilities, for negotiation or other purpose; an armistice. 2. Hence, intermission of action, pain, or contest; temporary cessation; short quiet.
Truck (n.) Commodities appropriate for barter, or for small trade; small commodities; esp., in the United States, garden vegetables raised for the market.
Trump (n.) A wind instrument of music; a trumpet, or sound of a trumpet; -- used chiefly in Scripture and poetry. 2. An old game with cards, nearly the same as whist; -- called also ruff.
Trunk (n.) The stem, or body, of a tree, apart from its limbs and roots; the main stem, without the branches; stock; stalk. 2. The body of an animal, apart from the head and limbs. 3. The main body of anything; as, the trunk of a vein or of an artery, as distinct from the branches. 4. That part of a pilaster which is between the base and the capital, corresponding to the shaft of a column. 5. That segment of the body of an insect which is between the head and abdomen, and bears the wings and legs; the thorax; the truncus. 6. A long tube through which pellets of clay, p/as, etc., are driven by the force of the breath. 7. A box or chest usually covered with leather, metal, or cloth, or sometimes made of leather, hide, or metal, for containing clothes or other goods; especially, one used to convey the effects of a traveler. 8. A large pipe forming the piston rod of a steam engine, of sufficient diameter to allow one end of the connecting rod to be attached to the crank, and the other end to pass within the pipe directly to the piston, thus making the engine more compact. 9. A long, large box, pipe, or conductor, made of plank or metal plates, for various uses, as for conveying air to a mine or to a furnace, water to a mill, grain to an elevator, etc.
Truss (n.) A bundle; a package; as, a truss of grass. 2. A padded jacket or dress worn under armor, to protect the body from the effects of friction; also, a part of a woman's dress; a stomacher. 3. A bandage or apparatus used in cases of hernia, to keep up the reduced parts and hinder further protrusion, and for other purposes. 4. A tuft of flowers formed at the top of the main stalk, or stem, of certain plants. 5. An assemblage of members of wood or metal, supported at two points, and arranged to transmit pressure vertically to those points, with the least possible strain across the length of any member. Architectural trusses when left visible, as in open timber roofs, often contain members not needed for construction, or are built with greater massiveness than is requisite, or are composed in unscientific ways in accordance with the exigencies of style. 6. To strengthen or stiffen, as a beam or girder, by means of a brace or braces. 7. To skewer; to make fast, as the wings of a fowl to the body in cooking it.
Trust (n.) Assured resting of the mind on the integrity, veracity, justice, friendship, or other sound principle, of another person; confidence; reliance; reliance. 2. Credit given; especially, delivery of property or merchandise in reliance upon future payment; exchange without immediate receipt of an equivalent; as, to sell or buy goods on trust. 3. Assured anticipation; dependence upon something future or contingent, as if present or actual; hope; belief. 4. An estate devised or granted in confidence that the devisee or grantee shall convey it, or dispose of the profits, at the will, or for the benefit, of another; an estate held for the use of another; a confidence respecting property reposed in one person, who is termed the trustee, for the benefit of another, who is called the cestui que trust. 5. An organization formed mainly for the purpose of regulating the supply and price of commodities, etc.; as, a sugar trust. 6. To place confidence in; to rely on, to confide, or repose faith, in; as, we can not trust those who have deceived us. 7. To commit, as to one's care; to intrust. 8. To give credit to; to sell to upon credit, or in confidence of future payment; as, merchants and manufacturers trust their customers annually with goods.
Truth (n.) The quality or being true; as: -- (a) Conformity to fact or reality; exact accordance with that which is, or has been; or shall be. 2. Conformity to rule; exactness; close correspondence with an example, mood, object of imitation, or the like. 3. That which is true or certain concerning any matter or subject, or generally on all subjects; real state of things; fact; verity; reality. 4. A true thing; a verified fact; a true statement or proposition; an established principle, fixed law, or the like; as, the great truths of morals.
Tryst (n.) An appointment to meet; also, an appointed place or time of meeting; as, to keep tryst; to break tryst.
Tuber (n.) A fleshy, rounded stem or root, usually containing starchy matter, as the potato or arrowroot; a thickened root-stock. See Illust. of Tuberous.
Tucan (n.) The Mexican pocket gopher (Geomys Mexicanus). It resembles the common pocket gopher of the Western United States, but is larger. Called also tugan, and tuza.
Tucet (n.) See Tucket, a steak.
Tucum (n.) A fine, strong fiber obtained from the young leaves of a Brazilian palm (Astrocaryum vulgare), used for cordage, bowstrings, etc.; also, the plant yielding this fiber. Called also tecum, and tecum fiber.
Tulle (n.) In plate armor, a suspended plate in from of the thigh. See Illust. of Tasses.
Tulip (n.) Any plant of the liliaceous genus Tulipa. Many varieties are cultivated for their beautiful, often variegated flowers.
Tulle (n.) A kind of silk lace or light netting, used for veils, etc.
Tumor (n.) A morbid swelling, prominence, or growth, on any part of the body; especially, a growth produced by deposition of new tissue; a neoplasm.
Tuner (n.) One who tunes; especially, one whose occupation is to tune musical instruments.
Tunic (n.) An under-garment worn by the ancient Romans of both sexes. It was made with or without sleeves, reached to or below the knees, and was confined at the waist by a girdle. 2. Any similar garment worm by ancient or Oriental peoples; also, a common name for various styles of loose-fitting under-garments and over-garments worn in modern times by Europeans and others. 3. A membrane, or layer of tissue, especially when enveloping an organ or part, as the eye. 4. A natural covering; an integument; as, the tunic of a seed. 5. See Mantle, n., 3 (a).
Tunny (n.) Any one of several species of large oceanic fishes belonging to the Mackerel family, especially the common or great tunny (Orcynus / Albacora thynnus) native of the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean. It sometimes weighs a thousand pounds or more, and is extensively caught in the Mediterranean. On the American coast it is called horse mackerel. See Illust. of Horse mackerel, under Horse.
Turbo (n.) Any one of numerous marine gastropods of the genus Turbo or family Turbinidae, usually having a turbinate shell, pearly on the inside, and a calcareous operculum.
Turko (n.) One of a body of native Algerian tirailleurs in the French army, dressed as a Turk.
Tutor (n.) One who guards, protects, watches over, or has the care of, some person or thing. 2. An officer or member of some hall, who instructs students, and is responsible for their discipline.
Tutty (n.) A yellow or brown amorphous substance obtained as a sublimation product in the flues of smelting furnaces of zinc, and consisting of a crude zinc oxide.
Twang (n.) A harsh, quick sound, like that made by a stretched string when pulled and suddenly let go; as, the twang of a bowstring.
Tweak (n.) A sharp pinch or jerk; a twist or twitch; as, a tweak of the nose.
Tweed (n.) A soft and flexible fabric for men's wear, made wholly of wool except in some inferior kinds, the wool being dyed, usually in two colors, before weaving.
Twine (n.) A strong thread composed of two or three smaller threads or strands twisted together, and used for various purposes, as for binding small parcels, making nets, and the like; a small cord or string. 2. To twist together; to form by twisting or winding of threads; to wreathe; as, fine twined linen. 3. To wind, as one thread around another, or as any flexible substance around another body.
Twist (n.) That which is formed by twisting, convoluting, or uniting parts. 2. A cord, thread, or anything flexible, formed by winding strands or separate things round each other. 3. A kind of closely twisted, strong sewing silk, used by tailors, saddlers, and the like. 4. A kind of cotton yarn, of several varieties. 5. A roll of twisted dough, baked. 6. One of the threads of a warp, -- usually more tightly twisted than the filling. 7. A material for gun barrels, consisting of iron and steel twisted and welded together; as, Damascus twist.
Uhlan (n.) One of a kind of light cavalry of Tartaric origin, first introduced into European armies in Poland. They are armed with lances, pistols, and sabers, and are employed chiefly as skirmishers.
Ukase (n.) In Russia, a published proclamation or imperial order, having the force of law.
Ulcer (n.) A solution of continuity in any of the soft parts of the body, discharging purulent matter, found on a surface, especially one of the natural surfaces of the body, and originating generally in a constitutional disorder; a sore discharging pus. It is distinguished from an abscess, which has its beginning, at least, in the depth of the tissues.
Ulema (n.) A college or corporation in Turkey composed of the hierarchy, namely, the imams, or ministers of religion, the muftis, or doctors of law, and the cadis, or administrators of justice.
Ulula (n.) A genus of owls including the great gray owl (Ulula cinerea) of Arctic America, and other similar species. See Illust. of Owl.
Umbel (n.) A kind of flower cluster in which the flower stalks radiate from a common point, as in the carrot and milkweed. It is simple or compound; in the latter case, each peduncle bears another little umbel, called umbellet, or umbellule.
Umber (n.) A brown or reddish pigment used in both oil and water colors, obtained from certain natural clays variously colored by the oxides of iron and manganese. It is commonly heated or burned before being used, and is then called burnt umber; when not heated, it is called raw umber. See Burnt umber, below. 2. See Grayling, 1. 3. An African wading bird (Scopus umbretta) allied to the storks and herons. It is dull dusky brown, and has a large occipital crest. Called also umbrette, umbre, and umber bird.
Umbra (n.) The conical shadow projected from a planet or satellite, on the side opposite to the sun, within which a spectator could see no portion of the sun's disk; -- used in contradistinction from penumbra. See Penumbra. 2. The central dark portion, or nucleus, of a sun spot. 3. Any one of several species of sciaenoid food fishes of the genus Umbrina, especially the Mediterranean species (U. cirrhosa), which is highly esteemed as a market fish; -- called also ombre, and umbrine.
Uncia (n.) A twelfth part, as of the Roman as; an ounce.
Uncle (n.) The brother of one's father or mother; also applied to an aunt's husband; -- the correlative of aunt in sex, and of nephew and niece in relationship.
Union (n.) The act of uniting or joining two or more things into one, or the state of being united or joined; junction; coalition; combination. 2. Agreement and conjunction of mind, spirit, will, affections, or the like; harmony; concord. 3. That which is united, or made one; something formed by a combination or coalition of parts or members; a confederation; a consolidated body; a league; as, the weavers have formed a union; trades unions have become very numerous; the United States of America are often called the Union. 4. A textile fabric composed of two or more materials, as cotton, silk, wool, etc., woven together. 5. A large, fine pearl. 6. A device emblematic of union, used on a national flag or ensign, sometimes, as in the military standard of Great Britain, covering the whole field; sometimes, as in the flag of the United States, and the English naval and marine flag, occupying the upper inner corner, the rest of the flag being called the fly. Also, a flag having such a device; especially, the flag of Great Britain. 7. A joint or other connection uniting parts of machinery, or the like, as the elastic pipe of a tender connecting it with the feed pipe of a locomotive engine; especially, a pipe fitting for connecting pipes, or pipes and fittings, in such a way as to facilitate disconnection. 8. A cask suspended on trunnions, in which fermentation is carried on.
Unity (n.) Concord; harmony; conjunction; agreement; uniformity; as, a unity of proofs; unity of doctrine. 2. Any definite quantity, or aggregate of quantities or magnitudes taken as one, or for which 1 is made to stand in calculation; thus, in a table of natural sines, the radius of the circle is regarded as unity. 3. In dramatic composition, one of the principles by which a uniform tenor of story and propriety of representation are preserved; conformity in a composition to these; in oratory, discourse, etc., the due subordination and reference of every part to the development of the leading idea or the eastablishment of the main proposition. 4. Such a combination of parts as to constitute a whole, or a kind of symmetry of style and character.
Upher (n.) A fir pole of from four to seven inches diameter, and twenty to forty feet long, sometimes roughly hewn, used for scaffoldings, and sometimes for slight and common roofs, for which use it is split.
Upset (n.) The act of upsetting, or the state of being upset; an overturn; as, the wagon had an upset.
Upsun (n.) The time during which the sun is up, or above the horizon; the time between sunrise and sunset.
Urate (n.) A salt of uric acid; as, sodium urate; ammonium urate.
Uredo (n.) One of the stages in the life history of certain rusts (Uredinales), regarded at one time as a distinct genus. It is a summer stage preceding the teleutospore, or winter stage. See Uredinales, in the Supplement.
Urine (n.) In mammals, a fluid excretion from the kidneys; in birds and reptiles, a solid or semisolid excretion.
Usage (n.) The act of using; mode of using or treating; treatment; conduct with respect to a person or a thing; as, good usage; ill usage; hard usage. 2. Customary use or employment, as of a word or phrase in a particular sense or signification.
Usher (n.) An officer or servant who has the care of the door of a court, hall, chamber, or the like; hence, an officer whose business it is to introduce strangers, or to walk before a person of rank. Also, one who escorts persons to seats in a church, theater, etc. 2. An under teacher, or assistant master, in a school.
Usnea (n.) A genus of lichens, most of the species of which have long, gray, pendulous, and finely branched fronds. Usnea barbata is the common bearded lichen which grows on branches of trees in northern forests.
Usual (n.) Such as is in common use; such as occurs in ordinary practice, or in the ordinary course of events; customary; ordinary; habitual; common.
Vagus (n.) The vagus, ore pneumogastric, nerve.
Value (n.) The property or aggregate properties of a thing by which it is rendered useful or desirable, or the degree of such property or sum of properties; worth; excellence; utility; importance. 2. Worth estimated by any standard of purchasing power, especially by the market price, or the amount of money agreed upon as an equivalent to the utility and cost of anything. 3. Precise signification; import; as, the value of a word; the value of a legal instrument 4. The relative length or duration of a tone or note, answering to quantity in prosody; thus, a quarter note [/] has the value of two eighth notes [/]. 5. In an artistical composition, the character of any one part in its relation to other parts and to the whole; -- often used in the plural; as, the values are well given, or well maintained.
Valve (n.) A door; especially, one of a pair of folding doors, or one of the leaves of such a door. 2. A lid, plug, or cover, applied to an aperture so that by its movement, as by swinging, lifting and falling, sliding, turning, or the like, it will open or close the aperture to permit or prevent passage, as of a fluid. 3. One or more membranous partitions, flaps, or folds, which permit the passage of the contents of a vessel or cavity in one direction, but stop or retard the flow in the opposite direction; as, the ileocolic, mitral, and semilunar valves. 4. A small portion of certain anthers, which opens like a trapdoor to allow the pollen to escape, as in the barberry.
Vapor (n.) Any substance in the gaseous, or aeriform, state, the condition of which is ordinarily that of a liquid or solid. 2. In a loose and popular sense, any visible diffused substance floating in the atmosphere and impairing its transparency, as smoke, fog, etc. 3. Something unsubstantial, fleeting, or transitory; unreal fancy; vain imagination; idle talk; boasting. 4. An old name for hypochondria, or melancholy; the blues. 5. To pass off in fumes, or as a moist, floating substance, whether visible or invisible, to steam; to be exhaled; to evaporate.
Varan (n.) The monitor. See Monitor, 3.
Varec (n.) The calcined ashes of any coarse seaweed used for the manufacture of soda and iodine; also, the seaweed itself; fucus; wrack.
Varix (n.) A uneven, permanent dilatation of a vein.
Vasum (n.) A genus including several species of large marine gastropods having massive pyriform shells, with conspicuous folds on the columella.
Vault (n.) An arched structure of masonry, forming a ceiling or canopy. 2. An arched apartment; especially, a subterranean room, use for storing articles, for a prison, for interment, or the like; a cell; a cellar. 3. A leap by aid of the hands, or of a pole, springboard, or the like.
Vaunt (n.) A vain display of what one is, or has, or has done; ostentation from vanity; a boast; a brag.
Vedro (n.) A Russian liquid measure, equal to 3.249 gallons of U. S. standard measure, or 2.706 imperial gallons.
Veery (n.) An American thrush (Turdus fuscescens) common in the Northern United States and Canada. It is light tawny brown above. The breast is pale buff, thickly spotted with brown. Called also Wilson's thrush.
Velum (n.) Curtain or covering; -- applied to various membranous partitions, especially to the soft palate. See under Palate. 2. See Veil, n., 3 (b).
Venew (n.) A bout, or turn, as at fencing; a thrust; a hit; a veney.
Venom (n.) Matter fatal or injurious to life; poison; particularly, the poisonous, the poisonous matter which certain animals, such as serpents, scorpions, bees, etc., secrete in a state of health, and communicate by thing or stinging.
Venue (n.) A neighborhood or near place; the place or county in which anything is alleged to have happened; also, the place where an action is laid.
Venus (n.) The goddess of beauty and love, that is, beauty or love deified. 2. One of the planets, the second in order from the sun, its orbit lying between that of Mercury and that of the Earth, at a mean distance from the sun of about 67,000,000 miles. Its diameter is 7,700 miles, and its sidereal period 224.7 days. As the morning star, it was called by the ancients Lucifer; as the evening star, Hesperus. 3. The metal copper; -- probably so designated from the ancient use of the metal in making mirrors, a mirror being still the astronomical symbol of the planet Venus. 4. Any one of numerous species of marine bivalve shells of the genus Venus or family Veneridae. Many of these shells are large, and ornamented with beautiful frills; others are smooth, glossy, and handsomely colored. Some of the larger species, as the round clam, or quahog, are valued for food.
Verge (n.) A rod or staff, carried as an emblem of authority; as, the verge, carried before a dean. 2. The stick or wand with which persons were formerly admitted tenants, they holding it in the hand, and swearing fealty to the lord. Such tenants were called tenants by the verge. 3. The compass of the court of Marshalsea and the Palace court, within which the lord steward and the marshal of the king's household had special jurisdiction; -- so called from the verge, or staff, which the marshal bore. 4. A border, limit, or boundary of a space; an edge, margin, or brink of something definite in extent. 5. The shaft of a column, or a small ornamental shaft. 6. The spindle of a watch balance, especially one with pallets, as in the old vertical escapement. See under Escapement. 7. A slip of grass adjoining gravel walks, and dividing them from the borders in a parterre. 8. The external male organ of certain mollusks, worms, etc. See Illustration in Appendix.
Verse (n.) A line consisting of a certain number of metrical feet (see Foot, n., 9) disposed according to metrical rules. 2. A stanza; a stave; as, a hymn of four verses.
Verso (n.) The reverse, or left-hand, page of a book or a folded sheet of paper; -- opposed to recto.
Verst (n.) A Russian measure of length containing 3,500 English feet.
Verve (n.) Excitement of imagination such as animates a poet, artist, or musician, in composing or performing; rapture; enthusiasm; spirit; energy.
Vesta (n.) One of the great divinities of the ancient Romans, identical with the Greek Hestia. She was a virgin, and the goddess of the hearth; hence, also, of the fire on it, and the family round it. 2. An asteroid, or minor planet, discovered by Olbers in 1807.
Vetch (n.) Any leguminous plant of the genus Vicia, some species of which are valuable for fodder. The common species is V. sativa.
Vifda (n.) In the Orkney and Shetland Islands, beef and mutton hung and dried, but not salted.
Vigor (n.) Active strength or force of body or mind; capacity for exertion, physically, intellectually, or morally; force; energy. 2. Strength or force in animal or force in animal or vegetable nature or action; as, a plant grows with vigor.
Vimen (n.) A long, slender, flexible shoot or branch.
Vinyl (n.) The hypothetical radical C2H3, regarded as the characteristic residue of ethylene and that related series of unsaturated hydrocarbons with which the allyl compounds are homologous.
Viola (n.) A genus of polypetalous herbaceous plants, including all kinds of violets. 2. An instrument in form and use resembling the violin, but larger, and a fifth lower in compass.
Vireo (n.) Any one of numerous species of American singing birds belonging to Vireo and allied genera of the family Vireonidae. In many of the species the back is greenish, or olive-colored. Called also greenlet.
Virgo (n.) A sign of the zodiac which the sun enters about the 21st of August, marked thus [/] in almanacs. 2. A constellation of the zodiac, now occupying chiefly the sign Libra, and containing the bright star Spica.
Visor (n.) A part of a helmet, arranged so as to lift or open, and so show the face. The openings for seeing and breathing are generally in it. 2. The fore piece of a cap, projecting over, and protecting the eyes.
Vista (n.) A view; especially, a view through or between intervening objects, as trees; a view or prospect through an avenue, or the like; hence, the trees or other objects that form the avenue.
Vitta (n.) A band, or stripe, of color.
Vives (n.) A disease of brute animals, especially of horses, seated in the glands under the ear, where a tumor is formed which sometimes ends in suppuration.
Vixen (n.) A cross, ill-tempered person; -- formerly used of either sex, now only of a woman.
Vocal (n.) A vocal sound; specifically, a purely vocal element of speech, unmodified except by resonance; a vowel or a diphthong; a tonic element; a tonic; -- distinguished from a subvocal, and a nonvocal.
Vogue (n.) The way or fashion of people at any particular time; temporary mode, custom, or practice; popular reception for the time; -- used now generally in the phrase in vogue.
Voice (n.) Sound uttered by the mouth, especially that uttered by human beings in speech or song; sound thus uttered considered as possessing some special quality or character; as, the human voice; a pleasant voice; a low voice. 2. Sound of the kind or quality heard in speech or song in the consonants b, v, d, etc., and in the vowels; sonant, or intonated, utterance; tone; -- distinguished from mere breath sound as heard in f, s, sh, etc., and also whisper. 3. The faculty or power of utterance; as, to cultivate the voice. 4. A particular mode of inflecting or conjugating verbs, or a particular form of a verb, by means of which is indicated the relation of the subject of the verb to the action which the verb expresses.
Volta (n.) A turning; a time; -- chiefly used in phrases signifying that the part is to be repeated one, two, or more times; as, una volta, once. Seconda volta, second time, points to certain modifications in the close of a repeated strain.
Volva (n.) A saclike envelope of certain fungi, which bursts open as the plant develops.
Vomer (n.) A bone, or one of a pair of bones, beneath the ethmoid region of the skull, forming a part a part of the partition between the nostrils in man and other mammals.
Vomit (n.) Matter that is vomited; esp., matter ejected from the stomach through the mouth.
Voter (n.) One who votes; one who has a legal right to vote, or give his suffrage; an elector; a suffragist; as, an independent voter.
Vowel (n.) A vocal, or sometimes a whispered, sound modified by resonance in the oral passage, the peculiar resonance in each case giving to each several vowel its distinctive character or quality as a sound of speech; -- distinguished from a consonant in that the latter, whether made with or without vocality, derives its character in every case from some kind of obstructive action by the mouth organs. Also, a letter or character which represents such a sound. See Guide to Pronunciation, // 5, 146-149.
Voyol (n.) See Viol, 2.
Vulva (n.) The external parts of the female genital organs; sometimes, the opening between the projecting parts of the external organs.
Wacky (n.) A soft, earthy, dark-colored rock or clay derived from the alteration of basalt.
Wader (n.) One who, or that which, wades. 2. Any long-legged bird that wades in the water in search of food, especially any species of limicoline or grallatorial birds; -- called also wading bird. See Illust. g, under Aves.
Wafer (n.) A thin cake or piece of bread (commonly unleavened, circular, and stamped with a crucifix or with the sacred monogram) used in the Eucharist, as in the Roman Catholic Church. 2. An adhesive disk of dried paste, made of flour, gelatin, isinglass, or the like, and coloring matter, -- used in sealing letters and other documents.
Wages (n.) A compensation given to a hired person for services; price paid for labor; recompense; hire. See Wage, n., 2.
Wagon (n.) A wheeled carriage; a vehicle on four wheels, and usually drawn by horses; especially, one used for carrying freight or merchandise. 2. The Dipper, or Charles's Wain.
Waist (n.) Hence, the middle part of other bodies; especially (Naut.), that part of a vessel's deck, bulwarks, etc., which is between the quarter-deck and the forecastle; the middle part of the ship. 2. A garment, or part of a garment, which covers the body from the neck or shoulders to the waist line.
Waltz (n.) A dance performed by two persons in circular figures with a whirling motion; also, a piece of music composed in triple measure for this kind of dance.
Waney (n.) A sharp or uneven edge on a board that is cut from a log not perfectly squared, or that is made in the process of squaring. See Wany, a.
Wanty (n.) A surcingle, or strap of leather, used for binding a load upon the back of a beast; also, a leather tie; a short wagon rope.
Watch (n.) An allotted portion of time, usually four hour for standing watch, or being on deck ready for duty. Cf. Dogwatch. 2. That part, usually one half, of the officers and crew, who together attend to the working of a vessel for an allotted time, usually four hours. The watches are designated as the port watch, and the starboard watch.
Water (n.) The fluid which descends from the clouds in rain, and which forms rivers, lakes, seas, etc. 2. A body of water, standing or flowing; a lake, river, or other collection of water. 3. Any liquid secretion, humor, or the like, resembling water; esp., the urine. 4. A solution in water of a gaseous or readily volatile substance; as, ammonia water. 5. The limpidity and luster of a precious stone, especially a diamond; as, a diamond of the first water, that is, perfectly pure and transparent. Hence, of the first water, that is, of the first excellence. 6. A wavy, lustrous pattern or decoration such as is imparted to linen, silk, metals, etc. See Water, v. t., 3, Damask, v. t., and Damaskeen. 7. To add water to (anything), thereby extending the quantity or bulk while reducing the strength or quality; to extend; to dilute; to weaken.
Weald (n.) A wood or forest; a wooded land or region; also, an open country; -- often used in place names.
Weave (n.) A particular method or pattern of weaving; as, the cassimere weave.
Weber (n.) The standard unit of electrical quantity, and also of current. See Coulomb, and Amp/re.
Wedge (n.) A piece of metal, or other hard material, thick at one end, and tapering to a thin edge at the other, used in splitting wood, rocks, etc., in raising heavy bodies, and the like. It is one of the six elementary machines called the mechanical powers. See Illust. of Mechanical powers, under Mechanical. 2. A solid of five sides, having a rectangular base, two rectangular or trapezoidal sides meeting in an edge, and two triangular ends. 3. A mass of metal, especially when of a wedgelike form. 4. Anything in the form of a wedge, as a body of troops drawn up in such a form.
Weigh (n.) A corruption of Way, used only in the phrase under weigh.
Weird (n.) Fate; destiny; one of the Fates, or Norns; also, a prediction.
Wekau (n.) A small New Zealand owl (Sceloglaux albifacies). It has short wings and long legs, and lives chiefly on the ground.
Welsh (n.) The language of Wales, or of the Welsh people.
Wench (n.) A low, vicious young woman; a drab; a strumpet.
Wends (n. pl.) A Slavic tribe which once occupied the northern and eastern parts of Germany, of which a small remnant exists.
Whaap (n.) The European curlew; -- called also awp, whaup, great whaup, and stock whaup. 2. The whimbrel; -- called also May whaup, little whaup, and tang whaup.
Whale (n.) Any aquatic mammal of the order Cetacea, especially any one of the large species, some of which become nearly one hundred feet long. Whales are hunted chiefly for their oil and baleen, or whalebone.
Wharf (n.) A structure or platform of timber, masonry, iron, earth, or other material, built on the shore of a harbor, river, canal, or the like, and usually extending from the shore to deep water, so that vessels may lie close alongside to receive and discharge cargo, passengers, etc.; a quay; a pier. 2. The bank of a river, or the shore of the sea.
Wharp (n.) A kind of fine sand from the banks of the Trent, used as a polishing powder.
Wheal (n.) A more or less elongated mark raised by a stroke; also, a similar mark made by any cause; a weal; a wale. 2. Specifically (Med.), a flat, burning or itching eminence on the skin, such as is produced by a mosquito bite, or in urticaria.
Wheat (n.) A cereal grass (Triticum vulgare) and its grain, which furnishes a white flour for bread, and, next to rice, is the grain most largely used by the human race.
Wheel (n.) A circular frame turning about an axis; a rotating disk, whether solid, or a frame composed of an outer rim, spokes or radii, and a central hub or nave, in which is inserted the axle, -- used for supporting and conveying vehicles, in machinery, and for various purposes; as, the wheel of a wagon, of a locomotive, of a mill, of a watch, etc. 2. Any instrument having the form of, or chiefly consisting of, a wheel. 3. A circular frame having handles on the periphery, and an axle which is so connected with the tiller as to form a means of controlling the rudder for the purpose of steering. 4. A firework which, while burning, is caused to revolve on an axis by the reaction of the escaping gases.
Wheft (n.) See Waft, n., 4.
Whelk (n.) Any one numerous species of large marine gastropods belonging to Buccinum and allied genera; especially, Buccinum undatum, common on the coasts both of Europe and North America, and much used as food in Europe.
Whelp (n.) One of the young of a dog or a beast of prey; a puppy; a cub; as, a lion's whelps. 2. One of the longitudinal ribs or ridges on the barrel of a capstan or a windless; -- usually in the plural; as, the whelps of a windlass.
Whiff (n.) A sudden expulsion of air from the mouth; a quick puff or slight gust, as of air or smoke. 2. The marysole, or sail fluke.
While (n.) Space of time, or continued duration, esp. when short; a time; as, one while we thought him innocent.
Whilk (n.) A kind of mollusk, a whelk.
Whine (n.) A plaintive tone; the nasal, childish tone of mean complaint; mean or affected complaint.
Whisk (n.) The act of whisking; a rapid, sweeping motion, as of something light; a sudden motion or quick puff. 2. A small bunch of grass, straw, twigs, hair, or the like, used for a brush; hence, a brush or small besom, as of broom corn. 3. A small culinary instrument made of wire, or the like, for whisking or beating eggs, cream, etc. 4. A kind of cape, forming part of a woman's dress. 5. To sweep, brush, or agitate, with a light, rapid motion; as, to whisk dust from a table; to whisk the white of eggs into a froth. 6. To move with a quick, sweeping motion.
Whist (n.) A certain game at cards; -- so called because it requires silence and close attention. It is played by four persons (those who sit opposite each other being partners) with a complete pack of fifty-two cards. Each player has thirteen cards, and when these are played out, he hand is finished, and the cards are again shuffled and distributed.
White (n.) The color of pure snow; one of the natural colors of bodies, yet not strictly a color, but a composition of all colors; the opposite of black; whiteness. See the Note under Color, n., 1. 2. Something having the color of snow; something white, or nearly so; as, the white of the eye. 3. Specifically, the central part of the butt in archery, which was formerly painted white; the center of a mark at which a missile is shot. 4. A person with a white skin; a member of the white, or Caucasian, races of men. 5. A white pigment; as, Venice white. 6. Any one of numerous species of butterflies belonging to Pieris, and allied genera in which the color is usually white. See Cabbage butterfly, under Cabbage.
Whole (n.) The entire thing; the entire assemblage of parts; totality; all of a thing, without defect or exception; a thing complete in itself.
Whoop (n.) A shout of pursuit or of war; a very of eagerness, enthusiasm, enjoyment, vengeance, terror, or the like; an halloo; a hoot, or cry, as of an owl. 2. A loud, shrill, prolonged sound or sonorous inspiration, as in whooping cough.
Whore (n.) A woman who practices unlawful sexual commerce with men, especially one who prostitutes her body for hire; a prostitute; a harlot.
Whorl (n. & v.) A circle of two or more leaves, flowers, or other organs, about the same part or joint of a stem. 2.  v.) A volution, or turn, of the spire of a univalve shell.
Whort (n.) The whortleberry, or bilberry. See Whortleberry (a).
Widdy (n.) A rope or halter made of flexible twigs, or withes, as of birch.
Widow (n.) A woman who has lost her husband by death, and has not married again; one living bereaved of a husband.
Width (n.) The quality of being wide; extent from side to side; breadth; wideness; as, the width of cloth; the width of a door.
Wigan (n.) A kind of canvaslike cotton fabric, used to stiffen and protect the lower part of trousers and of the skirts of women's dresses, etc.; -- so called from Wigan, the name of a town in Lancashire, England.
Wight (n.) A human being; a person, either male or female; -- now used chiefly in irony or burlesque, or in humorous language.
Willy (n.) Same as 1st Willow, 2.
Wince (n.) A reel used in dyeing, steeping, or washing cloth; a winch. It is placed over the division wall between two wince pits so as to allow the cloth to descend into either compartment. at will.
Winch (n.) A kick, as of a beast, from impatience or uneasiness. 2. A crank with a handle, for giving motion to a machine, a grindstone, etc. 3. An axle or drum turned by a crank with a handle, or by power, for raising weights, as from the hold of a ship, from mines, etc.; a windlass.
Winze (n.) A small shaft sunk from one level to another, as for the purpose of ventilation.
Wiper (n.) One who, or that which, wipes. 2. Something used for wiping, as a towel or rag. 3. A piece generally projecting from a rotating or swinging piece, as an axle or rock shaft, for the purpose of raising stampers, lifting rods, or the like, and leaving them to fall by their own weight; a kind of cam. 4. A rod, or an attachment for a rod, for holding a rag with which to wipe out the bore of the barrel.
Witch (n.) A cone of paper which is placed in a vessel of lard or other fat, and used as a taper. 2. One who practices the black art, or magic; one regarded as possessing supernatural or magical power by compact with an evil spirit, esp. with the Devil; a sorcerer or sorceress; -- now applied chiefly or only to women, but formerly used of men as well. 3. One who exercises more than common power of attraction; a charming or bewitching person; also, one given to mischief; -- said especially of a woman or child. 4. A certain curve of the third order, described by Maria Agnesi under the name versiera.
Withe (n.) A flexible, slender twig or branch used as a band; a willow or osier twig; a withy. 2. An iron attachment on one end of a mast or boom, with a ring, through which another mast or boom is rigged out and secured; a wythe.
Withy (n.) The osier willow (Salix viminalis). See Osier, n. (a). 2. A withe. See Withe, 1.
Witty (n.) Especially, possessing wit or humor; good at repartee; droll; facetious; sometimes, sarcastic; as, a witty remark, poem, and the like.
Woden (n.) A deity corresponding to Odin, the supreme deity of the Scandinavians. Wednesday is named for him. See Odin.
Woman (n.) An adult female person; a grown-up female person, as distinguished from a man or a child; sometimes, any female person.
Wootz (n.) A species of steel imported from the East Indies, valued for making edge tools; Indian steel. It has in combination a minute portion of alumina and silica.
World (n.) Any planet or heavenly body, especially when considered as inhabited, and as the scene of interests analogous with human interests; as, a plurality of worlds. 2. The earth and its inhabitants, with their concerns; the sum of human affairs and interests. 3. In a more restricted sense, that part of the earth and its concerns which is known to any one, or contemplated by any one; a division of the globe, or of its inhabitants; human affairs as seen from a certain position, or from a given point of view; also, state of existence; scene of life and action; as, the Old World; the New World; the religious world; the Catholic world; the upper world; the future world; the heathen world. 4. The customs, practices, and interests of men; general affairs of life; human society; public affairs and occupations; as, a knowledge of the world. 5. Individual experience of, or concern with, life; course of life; sum of the affairs which affect the individual; as, to begin the world with no property; to lose all, and begin the world anew. 6. The earth and its affairs as distinguished from heaven; concerns of this life as distinguished from those of the life to come; the present existence and its interests; hence, secular affairs; engrossment or absorption in the affairs of this life; worldly corruption; the ungodly or wicked part of mankind. 7. As an emblem of immensity, a great multitude or quantity; a large number.
Worry (n.) A state of undue solicitude; a state of disturbance from care and anxiety; vexation; anxiety; fret; as, to be in a worry.
Worse (n.) That which is worse; something less good; as, think not the worse of him for his enterprise.
Worst (n.) That which is most bad or evil; the most severe, pernicious, calamitous, or wicked state or degree.
Wound (n.) A hurt or injury caused by violence; specifically, a breach of the skin and flesh of an animal, or in the substance of any creature or living thing; a cut, stab, rent, or the like. 2. Fig.: An injury, hurt, damage, detriment, or the like, to feeling, faculty, reputation, etc. 3. An injury to the person by which the skin is divided, or its continuity broken; a lesion of the body, involving some solution of continuity. 4. To hurt by violence; to produce a breach, or separation of parts, in, as by a cut, stab, blow, or the like. 5. To hurt the feelings of; to pain by disrespect, ingratitude, or the like; to cause injury to.
Wrack (n.) A thin, flying cloud; a rack. 2. Any marine vegetation cast up on the shore, especially plants of the genera Fucus, Laminaria, and Zostera, which are most abundant on northern shores.
Wrest (n.) The act of wresting; a wrench; a violent twist; hence, distortion; perversion. 2. A partition in a water wheel, by which the form of the buckets is determined.
Wring (n.) A writhing, as in anguish; a twisting; a griping.
Wrist (n.) The joint, or the region of the joint, between the hand and the arm; the carpus. See Carpus.
Wythe (n.) Same as Withe, n., 4.
Xebec (n.) A small three-masted vessel, with projecting bow stern and convex decks, used in the Mediterranean for transporting merchandise, etc. It carries large square sails, or both. Xebecs were formerly armed and used by corsairs.
Xylem (n.) That portion of a fibrovascular bundle which has developed, or will develop, into wood cells; -- distinguished from phloem.
Xyris (n.) A genus of endogenous herbs with grassy leaves and small yellow flowers in short, scaly-bracted spikes; yellow-eyed grass. There are about seventeen species in the Atlantic United States.
Yacca (n.) A West Indian name for two large timber trees (Podocarpus coriaceus, and P. Purdicanus) of the Yew family. The wood, which is much used, is pale brownish with darker streaks.
Yacht (n.) A light and elegantly furnished vessel, used either for private parties of pleasure, or as a vessel of state to convey distinguished persons from one place to another; a seagoing vessel used only for pleasure trips, racing, etc.
Yager (n.) In the German army, one belonging to a body of light infantry armed with rifles, resembling the chasseur of the French army.
Yakin (n.) A large Asiatic antelope (Budorcas taxicolor) native of the higher parts of the Himalayas and other lofty mountains. Its head and neck resemble those of the ox, and its tail is like that of the goat. Called also budorcas.
Yeara (n.) The California poison oak (Rhus diversiloba). See under Poison, a.
Yeast (n.) The foam, or troth (top yeast), or the sediment (bottom yeast), of beer or other in fermentation, which contains the yeast plant or its spores, and under certain conditions produces fermentation in saccharine or farinaceous substances; a preparation used for raising dough for bread or cakes, and making it light and puffy; barm; ferment. 2. Spume, or foam, of water. 3. A form of fungus which grows as indvidual rounded cells, rather than in a mycelium, and reproduces by budding; esp. members of the orders Endomycetales and Moniliales. Some fungi may grow both as a yeast or as a mycelium, depending on the conditions of growth.
Yodle (n.) A song sung by yodeling, as by the Swiss mountaineers.
Yojan (n.) A measure of distance, varying from four to ten miles, but usually about five.
Young (n.) The offspring of animals, either a single animal or offspring collectively.
Youth (n.) The part of life that succeeds to childhood; the period of existence preceding maturity or age; the whole early part of life, from childhood, or, sometimes, from infancy, to manhood. 2. A young person; especially, a young man. 3. Young persons, collectively.
Yucca (n.) See Flicker, n., 2. 2. A genus of American liliaceous, sometimes arborescent, plants having long, pointed, and often rigid, leaves at the top of a more or less woody stem, and bearing a large panicle of showy white blossoms.
Yumas (n. pl.) A tribe of Indians native of Arizona and the adjacent parts of Mexico and California. They are agricultural, and cultivate corn, wheat, barley, melons, etc.
Zambo (n.) The child of a mulatto and a negro; also, the child of an Indian and a negro; colloquially or humorously, a negro; a sambo.
Zamia (n.) A genus of cycadaceous plants, having the appearance of low palms, but with exogenous wood. See Coontie, and Illust. of Strobile.
Zayat (n.) A public shed, or portico, for travelers, worshipers, etc.
Zebra (n.) Either one of two species of South African wild horses remarkable for having the body white or yellowish white, and conspicuously marked with dark brown or brackish bands.
Zebub (n.) A large noxious fly of Abyssinia, which like the tsetse fly, is destructive to cattle.
Zemni (n.) The blind mole rat (Spalax typhlus), native of Eastern Europe and Asia. Its eyes and ears are rudimentary, and its fur is soft and brownish, more or less tinged with gray. It constructs extensive burrows.
Ziega (n.) Curd produced from milk by adding acetic acid, after rennet has ceased to cause coagulation.
Zilla (n.) A low, thorny, suffrutescent, crucifeous plant (Zilla myagroides) found in the deserts of Egypt. Its leaves are boiled in water, and eaten, by the Arabs.
Zohar (n.) A Jewish cabalistic book attributed by tradition to Rabbi Simon ben Yochi, who lived about the end of the 1st century, a. d. Modern critics believe it to be a compilation of the 13th century.
Zooid (n.) An organic body or cell having locomotion, as a spermatic cell or spermatozooid. 2. An animal in one of its inferior stages of development, as one of the intermediate forms in alternate generation. 3. One of the individual animals in a composite group, as of Anthozoa, Hydroidea, and Bryozoa; -- sometimes restricted to those individuals in which the mouth and digestive organs are not developed.
Zulus (n. pl.) The most important tribe belonging to the Kaffir race. They inhabit a region on the southeast coast of Africa, but formerly occupied a much more extensive country. They are noted for their warlike disposition, courage, and military skill.
Abbot  n. Head of a community of monks. [old english from latin abbas]
Abort  v. 1 miscarry. 2 a effect abortion of (a foetus). B effect abortion in (a mother). 3 end or cause (a project etc.) To end before completion. [latin orior be born]
Abuse  v. (-sing) 1 use improperly, misuse. 2 insult verbally. 3 maltreat. n. 1 misuse. 2 insulting language. 3 unjust or corrupt practice. 4 maltreatment (child abuse).  abuser n. [latin: related to *use]
Acute  adj. (acuter, acutest) 1 serious, severe (acute hardship). 2 (of senses etc.) Keen, penetrating. 3 shrewd. 4 (of a disease) coming quickly to a crisis. 5 (of an angle) less than 90. 6 (of a sound) high, shrill. n. = *acute accent.  acutely adv. [latin acutus pointed]  Acute accent  n. Diacritical mark (?) placed over certain letters in french etc., esp. To show pronunciation.
Adieu  int. Goodbye. [french, = to god]
Admin  n. Colloq. Administration. [abbreviation]
Aegis  n. Protection; support. [greek aigis shield of zeus or athene]
Affix  v. 1 attach, fasten. 2 add in writing. n. 1 addition. 2 gram. Prefix or suffix. [latin: related to *fix]
Aggro  n. Slang 1 aggressive hostility. 2 trouble, difficulty. [abbreviation of aggravation or aggression]
Airer  n. Stand for airing or drying clothes etc.
Aitch  n. The letter h. [french ache]
Akela  n. Adult leader of cub scouts. [name of the leader of the wolf-pack in kipling's jungle book]
Alias  adv. Also named or known as. n. Assumed name. [latin, = at another time]
Align  v. 1 put or bring into line. 2 (usu. Foll. By with) ally (oneself etc.) With (a cause, party, etc.).  alignment n. [french a ligne into line]
Allot  v. (-tt-) apportion or distribute to (a person), esp. As a share or task (they were allotted equal sums). [french a to, *lot]
Alloy  n. 1 mixture of two or more metals. 2 inferior metal mixed esp. With gold or silver. v. 1 mix (metals). 2 debase by admixture. 3 moderate (pleasure alloyed with pain). [french: related to *ally]
Ambit  n. Scope, extent, or bounds. [latin: related to *ambience]
Amine  n. Compound formed from ammonia by replacement of one or more hydrogen atoms by an organic radical or radicals.
Angst  n. Anxiety, neurotic fear; guilt, remorse. [german]
Ankle  n. 1 joint connecting the foot with the leg. 2 this part of the leg. [old norse]
Aorta  n. (pl. -s) main artery, giving rise to the arterial network carrying oxygenated blood to the body from the heart.  aortic adj. [greek aeiro raise]
Aphid  n. Small insect infesting and damaging plants, e.g. The greenfly.
Aorta  n. (pl. -s) main artery, giving rise to the arterial network carrying oxygenated blood to the body from the heart.  aortic adj. [greek aeiro raise]
Aphid  n. Small insect infesting and damaging plants, e.g. The greenfly.
Appro  n. Colloq.  on appro = on approval (see *approval). [abbreviation]
Arete  n. Sharp mountain ridge. [french from latin arista spine]
Asian  n. 1 native of asia. 2 person of asian descent. adj. Of asia. [latin from greek]
Aspen  n. Poplar with very tremulous leaves. [old english: originally adj.]
Asset  n. 1 useful or valuable person or thing. 2 (usu. In pl.) Property and possessions, esp. That can be set against debts etc. [french asez from latin ad satis to enough] Asset-stripping  n. The taking over of a company and selling off of its assets to make a profit.
Attic  adj. Of ancient athens or attica, or the form of greek used there. n. Greek as used by the ancient athenians. [greek attikos] Attic  n. Space or room at the top of a house, usu. Under the roof. [from *attic, with ref. To an architectural feature]
Audio  n. (usu. Attrib.) Sound or its reproduction. [latin audio hear] Audio-  comb. Form hearing or sound. Audio frequency  n. Frequency able to be perceived by the human ear. Audio typist  n. Person who types from a tape-recording.
Audit  n. Official scrutiny of accounts. v. (-t-) conduct an audit of.
Aught  n. Archaic anything. [old english]
Auxin  n. Plant hormone that regulates growth.
Axiom  n. 1 established or accepted principle. 2 self-evident truth.  axiomatic adj. [greek axios worthy]
Aztec  n. 1 member of the native mexican people overthrown by the spanish in 1519. 2 language of this people. adj. Of the aztecs or their language. [nahuatl, = men of the north]
Baccy  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Tobacco. [abbreviation]
Baddy  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Villain in a story, film, etc.
Bagel  n. Ring-shaped bread roll. [yiddish]
Bairn  n. Scot. & n.engl. Child. [old english: related to *bear1]
Baize  n. Usu. Green woollen felted material, used for coverings. [french pl. Baies chestnut-coloured]
Baker  n. Person who bakes and sells bread, cakes, etc., esp. For a living.
Banjo  n. (pl. -s or -es) guitar-like stringed instrument with a circular body.  banjoist n. [us southern corruption of bandore from greek pandoura lute]
Bantu  n. (pl. Same or -s) 1 often offens. Member of a large group of central and southern african blacks. 2 group of languages spoken by them. adj. Of these peoples or languages. [bantu, = people]
Barmy  adj. (-ier, -iest) slang crazy, stupid. [from *barm: earlier, = frothy]
Barre  n. Horizontal bar at waist level, used in dance exercises. [french] 2. n. Method of playing a chord on the guitar etc. With a finger laid across the strings at a particular fret. [french barrer bar]
Bases  pl. Of *base1, *basis.
Basic  n. Computer programming language using familiar english words. [beginner's all-purpose symbolic instruction code] 2. adj. 1 serving as a base; fundamental. 2 a simplest or lowest in level (basic pay, needs). B vulgar (basic humour). n. (usu. In pl.) Fundamental facts or principles.  basically adv.
Basso  n. (pl. -s) singer with a bass voice. [italian, = *bass1]
Batch  n. 1 group of things or persons considered or dealt with together; instalment. 2 loaves produced at one baking. 3 computing group of records processed as one unit. v. Arrange or deal with in batches. [related to *bake]
Bathe  v. (-thing) 1 immerse oneself in water, esp. To swim or wash oneself. 2 immerse in, wash, or treat with liquid. 3 (of sunlight etc.) Envelop. n. Swim. [old english]
Batik  n. 1 method of dyeing textiles by applying wax to parts to be left uncoloured. 2 cloth so treated. [javanese, = painted]
Batty  adj. (-ier, -iest) slang crazy. [from *bat2]
Baulk  (also balk) v. 1 (often foll. By at) jib, hesitate. 2 a thwart, hinder. B disappoint. 3 miss, let slip (a chance etc.). n. 1 hindrance; stumbling-block. 2 roughly-squared timber beam. [old english]
Bawdy  adj. (-ier, -iest) humorously indecent. n. Such talk or writing. [bawd brothel-keeper from french baudetrot]
Biddy  n. (pl. -ies) slang woman (esp. Old biddy). [a form of the name bridget]
Bidet  n. Low basin for sitting on to wash the genital area. [french, = pony]
Bight  n. 1 bay, inlet, etc. 2 loop of rope. [old english]
Bijou  n. (pl. -x pronunc. Same) jewel; trinket. attrib. Adj. (bijou) small and elegant. [french]
Bimbo  n. (pl. -s or -es) slang usu. Derog. Attractive but unintelligent young woman. [italian, = little child]
Binge  slang n. Bout of excessive eating, drinking, etc.; spree. v. (-ging) indulge in a binge. [probably dial., = soak]
Bingo  n. Gambling game in which each player has a card with numbers to be marked off as they are called. [origin uncertain]
Blame  v. (-ming) 1 assign fault or responsibility to. 2 (foll. By on) fix responsibility for (an error etc.) On (blamed it on his brother). n. 1 responsibility for an error etc. 2 blaming or attributing of responsibility (got all the blame).  be to blame be responsible; deserve censure.  blameable adj. Blameless adj. Blameworthy adj. [french: related to *blaspheme]
Bleed  v. (past and past part. Bled) 1 emit blood. 2 draw blood from surgically. 3 colloq. Extort money from. 4 (often foll. By for) suffer wounds or violent death. 5 a emit sap. B (of dye) come out in water. 6 empty (a system) of excess air or fluid. n. Act of bleeding.  one's heart bleeds usu. Iron. One is very sorrowful. [old english]
Bleep  n. Intermittent high-pitched electronic sound. v. 1 make a bleep. 2 summon with a bleeper. [imitative]
Bless  v. (past and past part. Blessed, poet. Blest) 1 ask god to look favourably on, esp. By making the sign of the cross over. 2 consecrate (food etc.). 3 glorify (god). 4 attribute one's good luck to (stars etc.); thank. 5 (usu. In passive) make happy or successful (blessed with children).  bless me (or my soul) exclamation of surprise etc. Bless you! Exclamation of endearment, gratitude, etc., or to a person who has just sneezed. [old english]
Blimp  n. 1 (also (colonel) blimp) reactionary person. 2 small non-rigid airship. 3 soundproof cover for a cine-camera. [origin uncertain]
Blink  v. 1 shut and open the eyes quickly. 2 (often foll. By back) prevent (tears) by blinking. 3 shine unsteadily, flicker. n. 1 act of blinking. 2 momentary gleam or glimpse.  blink at 1 look at while blinking. 2 ignore, shirk. On the blink slang not working properly; out of order. [dutch, var. Of *blench]
Blitz  colloq. n. 1 a intensive or sudden (esp. Aerial) attack. B intensive period of work etc. (must have a blitz on this room). 2 (the blitz) german air raids on london in 1940. v. Inflict a blitz on. [abbreviation of *blitzkrieg]
Bloke  n. Slang man, fellow. [shelta]
Blond  (of a woman usu. Blonde) adj. (of a person, hair, or complexion) light-coloured, fair. n. Blond person. [latin blondus yellow]
Blues  n.pl. 1 (prec. By the) bout of depression. 2 a (prec. By the; often treated as sing.) Melancholic music of black american origin, usu. In a twelve-bar sequence. B (pl. Same) (as sing.) Piece of such music (played a blues).
Blunt  adj. 1 not sharp or pointed. 2 direct, outspoken. v. Make blunt or less sharp.  bluntly adv. (in sense 2 of adj.). Bluntness n. [probably scandinavian]
Blurb  n. Promotional description, esp. Of a book. [coined by g. Burgess 1907]
Boche  n. Slang derog. German, esp. A soldier. [french]
Bogey  n. (pl. -eys) golf 1 score of one stroke more than par at any hole. 2 (formerly) par. [perhaps from bogey, as an imaginary player] 2. n. (also bogy) (pl. -eys or -ies) 1 evil or mischievous spirit; devil. 2 awkward thing. 3 slang piece of dried nasal mucus. [originally (old) bogey the devil]
Bongo  n. (pl. -s or -es) either of a pair of small drums usu. Held between the knees and played with the fingers. [american spanish]
Booze  colloq. n. Alcoholic drink. v. (-zing) drink alcohol, esp. To excess.  boozy adj. (-ier, -iest). [dutch]
Boule  n. (also boules pronunc. Same) french form of bowls played on rough ground. [french]
Bourn  n. Small stream. [var. Of *burn2]
Bowie  n. (in full bowie knife) a kind of long hunting-knife. [bowie, name of an american soldier]
Boxer  n. 1 person who boxes, esp. As a sport. 2 medium-size short-haired dog with a puglike face.
Brand  n. 1 a particular make of goods. B identifying trade mark, label, etc. 2 (usu. Foll. By of) characteristic kind (brand of humour). 3 identifying mark burned esp. On livestock. 4 iron used for this. 5 piece of burning or charred wood. 6 stigma; mark of disgrace. 7 poet. Torch. v. 1 mark with a hot iron. 2 stigmatize (branded him a liar). 3 impress unforgettably. 4 assign a trademark etc. To. [old english]
Bravo  int. Expressing approval. n. (pl. -s) cry of bravo. [french from italian]
Break  v. (past broke; past part. Broken) 1 a separate into pieces under a blow or strain; shatter. B make or become inoperative. C break a bone in or dislocate (part of the body). 2 a interrupt (broke our journey). B have an interval (broke for tea). 3 fail to keep (a law, promise, etc.). 4 a make or become subdued or weak; (cause to) yield; destroy. B weaken the effect of (a fall, blow, etc.). C = break in 3c. 5 surpass (a record). 6 (foll. By with) end a friendship with (a person etc.). 7 a be no longer subject to (a habit). B (foll. By of) free (a person) from a habit (broke them of their addiction). 8 reveal or be revealed (broke the news; story broke). 9 a (of fine weather) change suddenly. B (of waves) curl over and foam. C (of the day) dawn. D (of clouds) move apart. E (of a storm) begin violently. 10 electr. Disconnect (a circuit). 11 a (of the voice) change with emotion. B (of a boy's voice) change at puberty. 12 a (often foll. By up) divide (a set etc.). B change (a banknote etc.) For coins. 13 r in financially (see also *broke adj.). 14 penetrate (e.g. A safe) by force. 15 decipher (a code). 16 make (a way, path, etc.) By force. 17 burst forth (sun broke through). 18 a (of troops) disperse in confusion. B rupture (ranks). 19 a (usu. Foll.
Brent  n. (in full brent-goose) small migratory goose. [origin unknown]
Brier  n. (also briar) wild rose or other prickly bush. [old english] 2.  n. (also briar) 1 white heath of s. Europe. 2 tobacco pipe made from its root. [french bruyere]
Briny  adj. (-ier, -iest) of brine or the sea; salty. n. (prec. By the) slang the sea.
Brood  n. 1 young of esp. A bird born or hatched at one time. 2 colloq. Children in a family. v. 1 worry or ponder (esp. Resentfully). 2 (of a bird) sit on eggs to hatch them. [old english]
Brook  n. Small stream. [old english] 2. v. (usu. With neg.) Literary tolerate, allow. [old english]
Brunt  n. Chief impact of an attack, task, etc. (esp. Bear the brunt of). [origin unknown]
Brute  n. 1 a brutal or violent person. B colloq. Unpleasant person or difficult thing. 2 animal. attrib. Adj. 1 unthinking (brute force). 2 cruel; stupid; sensual.  brutish adj. Brutishly adv. Brutishness n. [latin brutus stupid]
Buddy  n. (pl. -ies) esp. Us colloq. Friend or mate. [perhaps from *brother]
Bunny  n. (pl. -ies) 1 child's name for a rabbit. 2 (in full bunny girl) club hostess, waitress, etc., wearing rabbit ears and tail. [dial. Bun rabbit]
Buret  n. (brit. Burette) graduated glass tube with an end-tap for measuring liquid in chemical analysis. [french]
Buyer  n. 1 person employed to purchase stock for a large store etc. 2 purchaser, customer.
Cabby  n. (also cabbie) (pl. -ies) colloq. Taxi-driver.
Caber  n. Trimmed tree-trunk tossed as a sport in the scottish highlands. [gaelic]
Cabin  n. 1 small shelter or house, esp. Of wood. 2 room or compartment in an aircraft or ship for passengers or crew. 3 driver's cab. [french from latin]
Cadre  n. 1 basic unit, esp. Of servicemen. 2 group of esp. Communist activists. [french from latin quadrus square]
Carat  n. 1 unit of weight for precious stones (200 mg). 2 measure of purity of gold (pure gold = 24 carats). [french ultimately from greek keras horn]
Carer  n. Person who cares for a sick or elderly person, esp. A relative at home.
Caste  n. 1 any of the hindu hereditary classes whose members have no social contact with other classes. 2 exclusive social class or system of classes.  lose caste descend in social order. [spanish and portuguese: related to *chaste]
Caulk  v. (also calk) 1 stop up (the seams of a boat etc.). 2 make (esp. A boat) watertight. [latin calco tread]
Cavil  v. (-ll-, us -l-) (usu. Foll. By at, about) make petty objections; carp. n. Petty objection. [latin cavillor]
Cecum  n. (brit. Caecum) (pl. -ca) blind-ended pouch at the junction of the small and large intestines. [latin caecus blind]
Cedar  n. 1 spreading evergreen conifer. 2 its hard fragrant wood. [greek kedros]
Cello  n. (pl. -s) bass instrument of the violin family, held between the legs of the seated player.  cellist n. [abbreviation of *violoncello]
Chafe  v. (-fing) 1 make or become sore or damaged by rubbing. 2 make or become annoyed; fret. 3 rub (esp. The skin to restore warmth or sensation). n. Sore caused by rubbing. [latin calefacio make warm]
Champ  v. Munch or chew noisily. n. Chewing noise.  champ at the bit be restlessly impatient. [imitative] 2. n. Slang champion. [abbreviation]
Chant  n. 1 spoken singsong phrase. 2 a simple tune used for singing unmetrical words, e.g. Psalms. B song, esp. Monotonous or repetitive. v. 1 talk or repeat monotonously. 2 sing or intone (a psalm etc.). [latin canto from cano sing]
Chick  n. 1 young bird. 2 slang young woman. [old english: related to *chicken]
Chimp  n. Colloq. = *chimpanzee. [abbreviation]
Chubb  n. (in full chubb lock) propr. Lock with a device for fixing the bolt immovably should someone try to pick it. [chubb, name of a locksmith]
Churn  n. 1 large milk-can. 2 butter-making machine. v. 1 agitate (milk or cream) in a churn. 2 produce (butter) in a churn. 3 (usu. Foll. By up) upset, agitate.  churn out produce in large quantities. [old english]
Chyme  n. Acid pulp formed from partly-digested food. [greek khumos juice]
Civil  adj. 1 of or belonging to citizens. 2 of ordinary citizens; non-military. 3 polite, obliging, not rude. 4 law concerning private rights and not criminal offences. 5 (of the length of a day, year, etc.) Fixed by custom or law, not natural or astronomical.  civilly adv. [latin civilis: related to *civic]
Climb  v. 1 (often foll. By up) ascend, mount, go or come up. 2 grow up a wall etc. By clinging or twining. 3 progress, esp. In social rank. n. 1 ascent by climbing. 2 hill etc. Climbed or to be climbed.  climb down 1 descend, esp. Using hands. 2 withdraw from a stance taken up in an argument etc.  climber n. [old english]
Clime  n. Literary 1 region. 2 climate. [latin: related to *climate]
Cling  v. (past and past part. Clung) 1 (often foll. By to) adhere. 2 (foll. By to) be unwilling to give up; be emotionally dependent on (a habit, idea, friend, etc.). 3 (often foll. By to) maintain grasp; keep hold; resist separation.  clingy adj. (-ier, -iest). [old english]
Clone  n. 1 a group of organisms produced asexually from one stock or ancestor. B one such organism. 2 colloq. Person or thing regarded as identical to another. v. (-ning) propagate as a clone.  clonal adj. [greek klon twig]
Clonk  n. Abrupt heavy sound of impact. v. 1 make this sound. 2 colloq. Hit. [imitative]
Clump  n. (foll. By of) cluster or mass, esp. Of trees. v. 1 a form a clump. B heap or plant together. 2 (also clomp) walk with a heavy tread. [low german or dutch]
Clunk  n. Dull sound as of thick pieces of metal meeting. v. Make such a sound. [imitative]
Cobol  n. Computer language for use in commerce. [common business oriented language]
Cobra  n. Venomous hooded snake of africa and asia. [latin colubra snake]
Coley  n. (pl. -s) any of several fish used as food, e.g. The rock-salmon. [origin uncertain]
Combo  n. (pl. -s) slang small jazz or dance band. [abbreviation of *combination]
Comic  adj. 1 of or like comedy. 2 funny. n. 1 comedian. 2 periodical in the form of comic strips.  comical adj. Comically adv. [greek komos revel]
Conga  n. 1 latin-american dance, with a line of dancers one behind the other. 2 tall narrow drum beaten with the hands. v. (congas, congaed or conga'd, congaing) perform the conga. [spanish conga (feminine), = of the congo]
Cooee  n. & int. Colloq. Call used to attract attention. [imitative]
Copal  n. Resin of a tropical tree, used for varnish. [spanish from aztec]
Copse  n. = *coppice. [shortened form]
Corgi  n. (pl. -s) dog of a short-legged breed with a foxlike head. [welsh]
Couch  n. 1 upholstered piece of furniture for several people; sofa. 2 long padded seat with a headrest at one end. v. 1 (foll. By in) express in (certain terms). 2 archaic (of an animal) lie, esp. In its lair. [latin colloco lay in place] 2.  n. (in full couch grass) a grass with long creeping roots. [var. Of *quitch]
Cough  v. 1 expel air etc. From the lungs with a sudden sharp sound. 2 (of an engine etc.) Make a similar sound. 3 slang confess. n. 1 act of coughing. 2 condition of respiratory organs causing coughing.  cough up 1 eject with coughs. 2 slang bring out or give (money or information) reluctantly. [imitative, related to dutch kuchen]
Coven  n. Assembly of witches. [related to *convent]
Craps  n.pl. Us (also crap game) gambling dice game. [origin uncertain]
Crazy  adj. (-ier, -iest) 1 colloq. Insane or mad; foolish. 2 (usu. Foll. By about) colloq. Extremely enthusiastic. 3 (attrib.) (of paving etc.) Made up of irregular pieces.  crazily adv. Craziness n.
Creak  n. Harsh scraping or squeaking sound. v. 1 make a creak. 2 a move stiffly or with a creaking noise. B be poorly constructed (plot creaks). [imitative]
Creed  n. 1 set of principles or beliefs. 2 system of religious belief. 3 (often the creed) formal summary of christian doctrine. [latin: related to *credo]
Creme  n. 1 = *cream n. 4. 2 liqueur (creme de cassis). [french, = cream]
Crepe  n. 1 fine gauzy wrinkled fabric. 2 thin pancake with a savoury or sweet filling. 3 hard-wearing wrinkled sheet rubber used for the soles of shoes etc.  crepey adj. Crepy adj. [latin: related to *crisp]
Crimp  v. 1 press into small folds; corrugate. 2 make waves in (hair). n. Crimped thing or form. [low german or dutch]
Crony  n. (pl. -ies) friend, companion. [greek khronios long-lasting]
Crude  adj. 1 a in the natural state; not refined. B unpolished; lacking finish. 2 a rude, blunt. B offensive, indecent. 3 inexact. n. Natural mineral oil.  crudely adv. Crudeness n. Crudity n. [latin crudus raw]
Cryer  var. Of *crier.
Cupid  n. 1 roman god of love, represented as a naked winged boy archer. 2 (also cupid) representation of cupid. [latin cupio desire]
Cuppa  n. Colloq. 1 cup of. 2 cup of tea. [corruption]
Curie  n. Unit of radioactivity. [p. Curie, name of a scientist]
Curio  n. (pl. -s) rare or unusual object. [abbreviation of *curiosity]
Curse  n. 1 solemn invocation of divine wrath on a person or thing. 2 supposed resulting evil. 3 violent or profane exclamation or oath. 4 thing causing evil or harm. 5 (prec. By the) colloq.
Curve  n. 1 line or surface of which no part is straight or flat. 2 curved form or thing. 3 curved line on a graph. v. (-ving) bend or shape to form a curve.  curved adj. [latin curvus curved]
Cutis  n. True skin, beneath the epidermis. [latin]
Cuvee  n. Blend or batch of wine. [french, = vatful]
Dacha  n. Russian country cottage. [russian]
Daddy  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Father. [from *dad]
Dally  v. (-ies, -ied) 1 delay; waste time. 2 (often foll. By with) flirt, trifle.  dalliance n. [french]
Dance  v. (-cing) 1 move rhythmically, usu. To music. 2 skip or jump about. 3 perform (a specified dance, role, etc.). 4 bob up and down. 5 dandle (a child). n. 1 a dancing as an art form. B style or form of this. 2 social gathering for dancing. 3 single round or turn of a dance. 4 music for dancing to. 5 lively motion.  dance attendance on serve obsequiously. Lead a person a dance (or merry dance) cause a person much trouble.  danceable adj. Dancer n. [french]
Darky  n. (also darkie) (pl. -ies) slang offens. Black person.
Datum  see *data.
Death  n. 1 irreversible ending of life; dying or being killed. 2 instance of this. 3 destruction; ending (death of our hopes). 4 being dead (eyes closed in death). 5 (usu. Death) personification of death, esp. As a skeleton. 6 lack of spiritual life.  at death's door close to death. Be the death of 1 cause the death of. 2 be annoying or harmful to. Catch one's death colloq. Catch a serious chill etc. Do to death 1 kill. 2 overdo. Fate worse than death colloq. Very unpleasant experience. Put to death kill or cause to be killed. To death to the utmost, extremely (bored to death).  deathlike adj. [old english]
Debug  v. (-gg-) colloq. 1 remove concealed microphones from (a room etc.). 2 remove defects from (a computer program etc.). 3 = *delouse.
Decor  n. Furnishing and decoration of a room, stage set, etc. [french: related to *decorate]
Dekko  n. (pl. -s) slang look, glance. [hindi]
Delft  n. (also delftware) glazed, usu. Blue and white, earthenware. [delft in holland]
Demur  v. (-rr-) 1 (often foll. By to, at) raise objections. 2 law put in a demurrer. n. (usu. In neg.) Objection; objecting (agreed without demur). [latin moror delay]
Dhoti  n. (pl. -s) loincloth worn by male hindus. [hindi]
Dildo  n. (pl. -s) artificial erect penis for sexual stimulation. [origin unknown]
Dinar  n. Chief monetary unit of yugoslavia and several countries of the middle east and n. Africa. [arabic and persian from latin *denarius]
Diner  n. 1 person who dines. 2 dining-car. 3 us small restaurant. 4 small dining-room.
Diode  n. 1 semiconductor allowing the flow of current in one direction only and having two terminals. 2 thermionic valve having two electrodes. [from *di-1, *electrode]
Dipso  n. (pl. -s) colloq. Alcoholic. [abbreviation]
Dirge  n. 1 lament for the dead. 2 any dreary piece of music. [latin imperative dirige = direct, used in the office for the dead]
Disco  colloq. n. (pl. -s) = *discotheque. v. (-es, -ed) dance to disco music. [abbreviation]
Ditty  n. (pl. -ies) short simple song. [latin: related to *dictate]
Divvy  colloq. n. (pl. -ies) dividend. v. (-ies, -ied) (often foll. By up) share out. [abbreviation]
Doggy  adj. 1 of or like a dog. 2 devoted to dogs. n. (also doggie) (pl. -ies) pet name for a dog.
Dolby  n. Propr. Electronic noise-reduction system used esp. In tape-recording to reduce hiss. [name of its inventor]
Dolma  n. (pl. -s or dolmades) e. European delicacy of spiced rice or meat etc. Wrapped in vine or cabbage leaves. [modern greek]
Dolor  n. (brit. Dolour) literary sorrow, distress.  dolorous adj. [latin dolor pain]
Donna  n. Title of an italian, spanish, or portuguese lady. [latin domina mistress]
Donut  n. (brit. Doughnut) small fried cake of sweetened dough.
Doric  adj. 1 archit. Of the oldest and simplest of the greek orders. 2 (of a dialect) broad, rustic. n. Rustic english or esp. Scots. [from doris in greece]
Doubt  n. 1 uncertainty; undecided state of mind. 2 cynicism. 3 uncertain state. 4 lack of full proof or clear indication. v. 1 feel uncertain or undecided about. 2 hesitate to believe. 3 call in question.  in doubt open to question. No doubt certainly; probably; admittedly. Without doubt (or a doubt) certainly. [latin dubito hesitate]
Doyen  n. (fem. Doyenne) senior member of a group. [french: related to *dean1]
Dozen  n. 1 (prec. By a or a number) (pl. Dozen) twelve (a dozen eggs; two dozen eggs). 2 set of twelve (sold in dozens). 3 (in pl.; usu. Foll. By of) colloq. Very many (dozens of errors).  talk nineteen to the dozen talk incessantly. [latin duodecim twelve]
Draft  n. 1 preliminary written version of a speech, document, etc., or outline of a scheme. 2 a written order for payment of money by a bank. B drawing of money by this. 3 a detachment from a larger group. B selection of this. 4 us conscription. 5 us = *draught. v. 1 prepare a draft of (a document, scheme, etc.). 2 select for a special duty or purpose. 3 us conscript. [phonetic spelling of *draught]
Drape  v. (-ping) 1 hang or cover loosely, adorn with cloth etc. 2 arrange (hangings etc.) Esp. In folds. n. (in pl.) Us curtains. [latin drappus cloth]
Dregs  n.pl. 1 sediment; grounds, lees. 2 = *scum n. 2 (dregs of humanity). [old norse]
Drool  v. 1 slobber, dribble. 2 (often foll. By over) admire extravagantly. [from *drivel]
Drunk  adj. 1 lacking control from drinking alcohol. 2 (often foll. By with) overcome with joy, success, power, etc. n. Person who is drunk, esp. Habitually. [past part. Of *drink]
Dryad  n. Wood nymph. [greek drus tree]
Duchy  n. (pl. -ies) territory of a duke or duchess; royal dukedom of cornwall or lancaster. [medieval latin ducatus: related to *duke]
Ducky  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. (esp. As a form of address) dear.
Dumbo  n. (pl. -s) slang stupid person. [from *dumb, *-o]
Dumps  n.pl. (usu. In down in the dumps) colloq. Low spirits. [low german or dutch: related to *damp]
Dumpy  adj. (-ier, -iest) short and stout.  dumpily adv. Dumpiness n. [related to *dumpling]
Dunce  n. Person slow at learning; dullard. [duns scotus, name of a philosopher]
Durex  n. Propr. Condom. [origin uncertain]
Dutch  adj. Of the netherlands or its people or language. n. 1 the dutch language. 2 (prec. By the; treated as pl.) The people of the netherlands.  go dutch share expenses on an outing etc. [dutch]
Dutch  n. Slang wife. [abbreviation of *duchess]
Duvet  n. Thick soft quilt used instead of sheets and blankets. [french]
Dwell  v. (past and past part. Dwelt or dwelled) live, reside.  dwell on (or upon) think, write, or speak at length on.  dweller n. [old english, = lead astray]
Eclat  n. 1 brilliant display. 2 social distinction; conspicuous success. [french]
Edema  n. (brit. Oedema) accumulation of excess fluid in body tissues, causing swelling. [greek oideo swell]
Edify  v. (-ies, -ied) improve morally or intellectually.  edification n. [latin aedifico build]
Educe  v. (-cing) literary bring out or develop from latency.  eduction n. [latin educo -ere draw out]
Elegy  n. (pl. -ies) 1 sorrowful poem or song, esp. For the dead. 2 poem in elegiac metre. [latin from greek]
Elegy  n. (pl. -ies) 1 sorrowful poem or song, esp. For the dead. 2 poem in elegiac metre. [latin from greek]
Elver  n. Young eel. [from *eel, *fare]
Email  n. (also e-mail) = *electronic mail.
Enter  v. 1 go or come in or into. 2 come on stage (also as a direction: enter macbeth). 3 penetrate (bullet entered his arm). 4 write (name, details, etc.) In a list, book, etc. 5 register, record the name of as a competitor (entered for the long jump). 6 a become a member of (a society or profession). B enrol in a school etc. 7 make known; present for consideration (enter a protest). 8 record formally (before a court of law etc.). 9 (foll. By into) a engage in (conversation etc.). B subscribe to; bind oneself by (an agreement, contract, etc.). C form part of (a calculation, plan, etc.). D sympathize with (feelings). 10 (foll. By on, upon) a begin; begin to deal with. B assume the functions of (an office) or possession of (property). [latin intra within]
Ernie  n. Device for drawing prize-winning numbers of premium bonds. [electronic random number indicator equipment]
Exude  v. (-ding) 1 ooze out. 2 emit (a smell). 3 display (an emotion etc.) Freely.  exudation n. [latin sudo sweat]
Eyrie  n. 1 nest of a bird of prey, esp. An eagle, built high up. 2 house etc. Perched high up. [french aire lair, from latin agrum piece of ground]
Ethic  n. Set of moral principles (the quaker ethic). adj. = *ethical. [greek: related to *ethos]
Ethos  n. Characteristic spirit or attitudes of a community etc. [greek ethos character]
Evens  n.pl. = *even money.
Expat  n. & adj. Colloq. Expatriate. [abbreviation]
Facer  n. Colloq. Sudden difficulty.
Fakir  n. Muslim or (rarely) hindu religious beggar or ascetic. [arabic, = poor man]
False  adj. 1 wrong, incorrect. 2 spurious, artificial. 3 improperly so called (false acacia). 4 deceptive. 5 (foll. By to) deceitful, treacherous, or unfaithful.  falsely adv. Falseness n. [latin falsus: related to *fail]
Fanny  n. (pl. -ies) 1 coarse slang the female genitals. 2 us slang the buttocks. [origin unknown]
Farce  n. 1 a low comedy with a ludicrously improbable plot. B this branch of drama. 2 absurdly futile proceedings; pretence.  farcical adj. [latin farcio to stuff, used metaphorically of interludes etc.]
Farsi  n. Modern persian language. [persian]
Fatwa  n. Legal decision or ruling by an islamic religious leader. [arabic]
Fecal  us var. Of faecal (*feces).
Feces  n.pl. (brit. Faeces) waste matter discharged from the bowels.  faecal adj. [latin]
Feint  n. 1 sham attack or diversionary blow. 2 pretence. v. Make a feint. adj. = *faint adj. 5. [french: related to *feign]
Felon  n. Person who has committed a felony. [medieval latin fello]
Femur  n. (pl. -s or femora) thigh-bone.  femoral adj. [latin]
Ferry  n. (pl. -ies) 1 boat or aircraft etc. For esp. Regular transport, esp. Across water. 2 place or service of ferrying. v. (-ies, -ied) 1 convey or go in a ferry. 2 (of a boat etc.) Cross water regularly. 3 transport, esp. Regularly, from place to place.  ferryman n. [old norse]
Fiber  n. (brit. Fibre) 1 thread or filament forming tissue or textile. 2 piece of threadlike glass. 3 substance formed of fibres, or able to be spun, woven, etc. 4 structure; character (moral fibre). 5 roughage. [french from latin fibra]
Fiche  n. (pl. Same or -s) microfiche. [abbreviation]
Fiend  n. 1 evil spirit, demon. 2 a wicked or cruel person. B mischievous or annoying person. 3 slang devotee (fitness fiend). 4 difficult or unpleasant thing.  fiendish adj. Fiendishly adv. [old english]
Fight  v. (past and past part. Fought) 1 (often foll. By against, with) contend or contend with in war, battle, single combat, etc. 2 engage in (a battle, duel, etc.). 3 contend (an election); maintain (a lawsuit, cause, etc.) Against an opponent. 4 strive to achieve something or to overcome (disease, fire, etc.). 5 make (one's way) by fighting. n. 1 a combat. B boxing-match. C battle. 2 conflict, struggle, or effort. 3 power or inclination to fight (no fight left).  fight back 1 counter-attack. 2 suppress (tears etc.). Fight for 1 fight on behalf of. 2 fight to secure. Fight a losing battle struggle without hope of success. Fight off repel with effort. Fight out (usu. Fight it out) settle by fighting. Fight shy of avoid. Put up a fight offer resistance. [old english]
Filth  n. 1 repugnant or extreme dirt. 2 obscenity. [old english: related to *foul]
Final  adj. 1 situated at the end, coming last. 2 conclusive, decisive. n. 1 last or deciding heat or game in sports etc. (cup final). 2 last daily edition of a newspaper. 3 (usu. In pl.) Examinations at the end of a degree course.  finally adv. [latin finis end]
Finis  n. End, esp. Of a book. [latin]
Firth  n. (also frith) 1 narrow inlet of sea. 2 estuary. [old norse: related to *fiord]
Fiver  n. Colloq. Five-pound note.
Fixer  n. 1 person or thing that fixes. 2 photog. Substance for fixing a photographic image etc. 3 colloq. Person who makes esp. Illicit deals.
Flair  n. 1 natural talent in a specific area (flair for languages). 2 style, finesse. [french flairer to smell]
Fleet  n. 1 a warships under one commander-in-chief. B (prec. By the) nation's warships etc.; navy. 2 number of vehicles in one company etc. adj. Poet. Literary swift, nimble. [old english]
Flood  n. 1 a overflowing or influx of water, esp. Over land; inundation. B the water that overflows. 2 outpouring; torrent (flood of tears). 3 inflow of the tide (also in comb.: flood-tide).
Flout  v. Disobey (the law etc.) Contemptuously; mock; insult. n. Flouting speech or act. [dutch fluiten whistle: related to *flute]
Fluid  n. 1 substance, esp. A gas or liquid, whose shape is determined by its confines. 2 fluid part or secretion. adj. 1 able to flow and alter shape freely. 2 constantly changing (situation is fluid).
Flunk  v. Us colloq. Fail (esp. An exam). [origin unknown]
Forme  n. Printing body of type secured in a chase ready for printing. [var. Of *form]
Forte  n. Person's strong point or speciality. [feminine of french *fort] 2.  mus. adj. Loud. adv. Loudly. n. Loud playing or passage. [italian: related to *fort]
Fosse  n. Long ditch or trench, esp. In a fortification. [latin fossa]
Fount  n. Poet. Spring or fountain; source. [back-formation from *fountain] 2.  n. (also font) set of printing-type of same face and size. [french: related to *found3]
Foyer  n. Entrance-hall in a hotel, theatre, etc. [french, = hearth, home, from latin *focus]
Franc  n. Unit of currency of france, belgium, switzerland, etc. [french: related to *frank]
Fraud  n. 1 criminal deception. 2 dishonest artifice or trick. 3 person or thing that is not what it claims to be. [latin fraus fraud-]
Freak  n. 1 (often attrib.) Monstrosity; abnormal person or thing (freak storm). 2 colloq. A unconventional person. B fanatic of a specified kind (health freak). C drug addict. v. (often foll. By out) colloq. 1 become or make very angry. 2 (cause to) undergo hallucinations etc., esp. As a result of drug abuse. 3 adopt an unconventional lifestyle.  freakish adj. Freaky adj. (-ier, -iest). [probably from dial.]
Frill  n. 1 strip of gathered or pleated material as an ornamental edging. 2 (in pl.) Unnecessary embellishments. v. Decorate with a frill.  frilly adj. (-ier, -iest). [origin unknown]
Frisk  v. 1 leap or skip playfully. 2 slang search (a person) for a weapon etc. By feeling. n. 1 playful leap or skip. 2 slang frisking of a person. [french frisque lively]
Frost  n. 1 a frozen dew or vapour. B consistent temperature below freezing point. 2 cold dispiriting atmosphere. v. 1 (usu. Foll. By over, up) become covered with frost. 2 a cover with or as with frost. B injure (a plant etc.) With frost. 3 make (glass) non-transparent by roughening its surface. [old english: related to *freeze]
Fruit  n. 1 a seed-bearing part of a plant or tree; this as food. B these collectively. 2 (usu. In pl.) Vegetables, grains, etc. As food (fruits of the earth). 3 (usu. In pl.) Profits, rewards. v. (cause to) bear fruit. [latin fructus from fruor enjoy]
Fryer  n. (also frier) 1 person who fries. 2 vessel for frying esp. Fish.
Fudge  n. 1 soft toffee-like sweet made of milk, sugar, butter, etc. 2 piece of dishonesty or faking. v. (-ging) make or do clumsily or dishonestly; fake (fudge the results). [origin uncertain]
Furor  n. (brit. Furore) 1 uproar; fury. 2 enthusiastic admiration. [latin: related to *fury]
Futon  n. Japanese quilted mattress used as a bed; this sold with a low wooden frame, often convertible into a couch. [japanese]
Gaffe  n. Blunder; indiscreet act or remark. [french]
Gamin  n. 1 street urchin. 2 impudent child. [french]
Gamut  n. Entire range or scope.  run the gamut of experience or perform the complete range of. [latin gamma ut, words arbitrarily taken as names of notes]
Gauss  n. (pl. Same) unit of magnetic flux density. [gauss, name of a mathematician]
Genie  n. (pl. Genii) (in arabian tales) spirit or goblin with magical powers. [french genie *genius: cf. *jinnee]
Gesso  n. (pl. -es) gypsum as used in painting or sculpture. [italian: related to *gypsum]
Gipsy  var. Of *gypsy.
Gismo  n. (also gizmo) (pl. -s) slang gadget. [origin unknown]
Gizmo  var. Of *gismo.
Glair  n. 1 white of egg. 2 adhesive preparation made from this. [french]
Glass  n. 1 a (often attrib.) Hard, brittle, usu. Transparent substance, made by fusing sand with soda and lime etc. B substance of similar properties. 2 glass objects collectively. 3 a glass drinking vessel. B its contents. 4 mirror. 5 glazed frame for plants. 6 barometer. 7 covering of a watch-face. 8 lens. 9 (in pl.) A spectacles. B binoculars. v. (usu. As glassed adj.) Fit with glass.  glassful n. (pl. -s). [old english]
Gleam  n. Faint or brief light or show. v. Emit gleams, shine. [old english]
Glitz  n. Slang showy glamour.  glitzy adj. (-ier, -iest). [from *glitter, *ritzy]
Gloat  v. (often foll. By over etc.) Look or consider with greed, malice, etc. n. Act of gloating. [origin unknown]
Gnash  v. 1 grind (the teeth). 2 (of the teeth) strike together. [old norse]
Golly  int. Expressing surprise. [euphemism for *god] 2.  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. = *golliwog. [abbreviation]
Goner  n. Slang person or thing that is doomed or irrevocably lost.
Gorse  n. Spiny yellow-flowered shrub; furze.  gorsy adj. [old english]
Gouda  n. Flat round usu. Dutch cheese. [gouda in holland]
Grand  adj. 1 splendid, magnificent, imposing, dignified. 2 main; of chief importance. 3 (grand) of the highest rank (grand duke). 4 colloq. Excellent, enjoyable. 5 belonging to high society. 6 (in comb.) (in names of family relationships) denoting the second degree of ascent or descent (granddaughter). n. 1 = *grand piano. 2 (pl. Same) (usu. In pl.) Esp. Us slang a thousand dollars or pounds.  grandly adv. Grandness n. [latin grandis full-grown]
Grant  v. 1 a consent to fulfil (a request etc.). B allow (a person) to have (a thing). 2 give formally; transfer legally. 3 (often foll. By that) admit as true; concede. n. 1 process of granting. 2 sum of money given by the state. 3 legal conveyance by written instrument.  take for granted 1 assume something to be true or valid. 2 cease to appreciate through familiarity.  grantor n. (esp. In sense 2 of v.). [french gr(e)anter var. Of creanter from latin credo entrust]
Graph  n. Diagram showing the relation between variable quantities, usu. Of two variables, each measured along one of a pair of axes. v. Plot or trace on a graph. [abbreviation of graphic formula]
Graph  n. Diagram showing the relation between variable quantities, usu. Of two variables, each measured along one of a pair of axes. v. Plot or trace on a graph. [abbreviation of graphic formula]
Graze  v. (-zing) 1 (of cattle, sheep, etc.) Eat growing grass. 2 a feed (cattle etc.) On growing grass. B feed on (grass). 3 pasture cattle. [old english: related to *grass] 2.  v. (-zing) 1 rub or scrape (part of the body, esp. The skin). 2 a touch lightly in passing. B (foll. By against, along, etc.) Move with a light passing contact. n. Abrasion. [perhaps from *graze1, as if take off the grass close to the ground]
Grief  n. 1 intense sorrow. 2 cause of this.  come to grief meet with disaster. [french: related to *grieve]
Grits  n.pl. 1 coarsely ground grain, esp. Oatmeal. 2 oats that have been husked but not ground. [old english]
Grope  v. (-ping) 1 (usu. Foll. By for) feel about or search blindly. 2 (foll. By for, after) search mentally. 3 feel (one's way) towards something. 4 slang fondle clumsily for sexual pleasure. n. Act of groping. [old english]
Gross  adj. 1 overfed, bloated. 2 (of a person, manners, or morals) coarse, unrefined, or indecent. 3 flagrant (gross negligence). 4 total; not net (gross tonnage). 5 (of the senses etc.) Dull. v. Produce as gross profit. n. (pl. Same) amount equal to twelve dozen.  grossly adv. Grossness n. [latin grossus]
Grove  n. Small wood or group of trees. [old english]
Guest  n. 1 person invited to visit another's house or to have a meal etc. At another's expense. 2 person lodging at a hotel etc. 3 outside performer invited to take part with a regular body of performers. [old norse]
Guild  n. (also gild) 1 association of people for mutual aid or the pursuit of a common goal. 2 medieval association of craftsmen or merchants. [low german or dutch gilde]
Guile  n. Cunning or sly behaviour; treachery, deceit.  guileful adj. Guileless adj. [french from scandinavian]
Guilt  n. 1 fact of having committed a specified or implied offence. 2 feeling of having done wrong. [old english]
Gully  n. (pl. -ies) 1 water-worn ravine. 2 gutter or drain. 3 cricket fielding position between point and slips. [french goulet: related to *gullet]
Gunny  n. (pl. -ies) 1 coarse sacking, usu. Of jute fibre. 2 sack made of this. [hindi and marathi]
Guppy  n. (pl. -ies) freshwater fish of the w. Indies and s. America frequently kept in aquariums. [guppy, name of a clergyman]
Gusto  n. Zest; enjoyment. [latin gustus taste]
Gynae  n. (also gynie) colloq. Gynaecology. [abbreviation]
Hacek  n. Diacritic (  ) placed over a letter to modify its sound in some languages. [czech, diminutive of hak hook]
Haiku  n. (pl. Same) japanese three-part poem of usu. 17 syllables. [japanese]
Hajji  n. (also hadji) (pl. -s) muslim who has made the pilgrimage to mecca. [persian from arabic]
Halal  n. (also hallal) (often attrib.) Meat from an animal killed according to muslim law. [arabic]
Halon  n. Any of various gaseous compounds of carbon, bromine, and other halogens, used to extinguish fires. [related to *halogen]
Halva  n. Confection of sesame flour and honey etc. [yiddish from turkish helva from arabic halwa]
Hanky  n. (also hankie) (pl. -ies) colloq. Handkerchief. [abbreviation]
Havoc  n. Widespread destruction; great disorder. [french havo(t)]
Hello  (also hallo, hullo) int. Expression of informal greeting, or of surprise, or to call attention. n. (pl. -s) cry of hello. [var. Of earlier hollo]
Henge  n. Prehistoric monument consisting of a circle of stone or wood uprights. [stonehenge in s. England]
Hertz  n. (pl. Same) si unit of frequency, equal to one cycle per second. [hertz, name of a physicist]
Hindu  n. (pl. -s) follower of hinduism. adj. Of hindus or hinduism. [urdu hind india]
Hinny  n. (pl. -ies) offspring of a female donkey and a male horse. [greek hinnos]
Hippo  n. (pl. -s) colloq. Hippopotamus. [abbreviation]
Hippy  var. Of *hippie. 2.  adj. Having large hips.
Hokum  n. Esp. Us slang 1 sentimental, sensational, or unreal material in a film or play etc. 2 bunkum; rubbish. [origin unknown]
Hooch  n. Us colloq. Alcoholic liquor, esp. Inferior or illicit whisky. [alaskan]
Houri  n. (pl. -s) beautiful young woman of the muslim paradise. [persian from arabic, = dark-eyed]
Hover  v. 1 (of a bird etc.) Remain in one place in the air. 2 (often foll. By about, round) wait close at hand, linger. n. 1 hovering. 2 state of suspense. [obsolete hove hover]
Hubby  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Husband. [abbreviation]
Human  adj. 1 of or belonging to the species homo sapiens. 2 consisting of human beings (the human race). 3 of or characteristic of humankind, esp. As being weak, fallible, etc. (is only human). 4 showing warmth, sympathy, etc. (is very human). n. Human being. [latin humanus]
Humph  int. & n. Inarticulate sound of doubt or dissatisfaction. [imitative]
Humus  n. Organic constituent of soil formed by the decomposition of vegetation. [latin, = soil]
Hurry  n. 1 great or eager haste. 2 (with neg. Or interrog.) Need for haste (there is no hurry; what's the hurry?). v. (-ies, -ied) 1 move or act hastily. 2 cause to hurry.
Husky  adj. (-ier, -iest) 1 (of a person or voice) dry in the throat; hoarse. 2 of or full of husks. 3 dry as a husk. 4 tough, strong, hefty.  huskily adv. Huskiness n. 2.  n. (pl. -ies) dog of a powerful breed used in the arctic for pulling sledges. [perhaps from corruption of *eskimo]
Hydro  n. (pl. -s) colloq. 1 hotel or clinic etc., orig. Providing hydropathic treatment. 2 hydroelectric power plant. [abbreviation]
Idyll  n. 1 short description, esp. In verse, of a peaceful or romantic, esp. Rural, scene or incident. 2 such a scene or incident. [greek eidullion]
Indie  colloq. adj. (of a pop group or record label) independent, not belonging to one of the major companies. n. Such a group or label. [abbreviation of *independent]
Inner  adj. (usu. Attrib.) 1 inside; interior. 2 (of thoughts, feelings, etc.) Deeper. n. Archery 1 division of the target next to the bull's-eye. 2 shot striking this.  innermost adj. [old english, comparative of *in]
Input  n. 1 what is put in or taken in. 2 place where energy, information, etc., enters a system. 3 action of putting in or feeding in. 4 contribution of information etc. v. (inputting; past and past part. Input or inputted) (often foll. By into) 1 put in. 2 supply (data, programs, etc., to a computer etc.).
Intro  n. (pl. -s) colloq. Introduction. [abbreviation]
Inuit  n. (also innuit) (pl. Same or -s) n. American eskimo. [eskimo inuit people]
Iraqi  adj. Of iraq. n. (pl. -s) 1 a native or national of iraq. B person of iraqi descent. 2 the form of arabic spoken in iraq.
Islet  n. 1 small island. 2 anat. Structurally distinct portion of tissue. [french diminutive of *isle]
Jaunt  n. Short pleasure trip. v. Take a jaunt. [origin unknown]
Jeans  n.pl. Casual esp. Denim trousers. [earlier geane fustian, = material from genoa]
Jehad  var. Of *jihad.
Jemmy  n. (pl. -ies) burglar's short crowbar. [from the name james]
Jerky  adj. (-ier, -iest) 1 moving suddenly or abruptly. 2 spasmodic.  jerkily adv. Jerkiness n.
Jerry  n. (pl. -ies) slang 1 german (esp. Soldier). 2 germans collectively. [probably an alteration of german] 2.  n. (pl. -ies) slang chamber-pot. [probably an abbreviation of *jeroboam]
Jihad  n. (also jehad) muslim holy war against unbelievers. [arabic jihad]
Jolly  adj. (-ier, -iest) 1 cheerful; merry. 2 festive, jovial. 3 colloq. Pleasant, delightful. adv. Colloq. Very. v. (-ies, -ied) (usu. Foll. By along) colloq. Coax or humour in a friendly way. n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Party or celebration.  jollily adv. Jolliness n. [french jolif gay, pretty: perhaps related to *yule] 2.  n. (pl. -ies) (in full jolly boat) clinker-built ship's boat smaller than a cutter. [origin unknown: perhaps related to *yawl]
Joust  hist. n. Combat between two knights on horseback with lances. v. Engage in a joust.  jouster n. [french jouste from latin juxta near]
Judas  n. Traitor. [judas iscariot who betrayed christ]
Judge  n. 1 public official appointed to hear and try legal cases. 2 person appointed to decide in a contest, dispute, etc. 3 a person who decides a question. B person regarded as having judgement of a specified type (am no judge; good judge of art). v. (-ging) 1 form an opinion or judgement (about); estimate, appraise. 2 act as a judge (of). 3  a try (a case) at law. B pronounce sentence on. 4 (often foll. By to + infin. Or that + clause) conclude, consider. [latin judex judic-]
Juicy  adj. (-ier, -iest) 1 full of juice; succulent. 2 colloq. Interesting; racy, scandalous. 3 colloq. Profitable.  juicily adv. Juiciness n.
Jumbo  n. (pl. -s) colloq. 1 (often attrib.) Large animal (esp. An elephant), person, or thing (jumbo packet). 2 (in full jumbo jet) large airliner for several hundred passengers. [probably from *mumbo-jumbo]
Kapok  n. Fine fibrous cotton-like substance from a tropical tree, used for padding. [malay]
Kappa  n. Tenth letter of the greek alphabet (k, k). [greek]
Karma  n. Buddhism & hinduism person's actions in previous lives, believed to decide his or her fate in future existences. [sanskrit, = action, fate]
Kazoo  n. Toy musical instrument into which the player sings or hums. [origin uncertain]
Kebab  n. Pieces of meat, vegetables, etc. Cooked on a skewer (cf. *doner kebab, *shish kebab). [urdu from arabic]
Kendo  n. Japanese fencing with two-handed bamboo swords. [japanese, = sword-way]
Khaki  adj. Dull brownish-yellow. n. (pl. -s) 1 khaki fabric or uniform. 2 dull brownish-yellow colour. [urdu, = dusty]
Kiddo  n. (pl. -s) slang = *kid1 n. 3.
Kitty  n. (pl. -ies) 1 fund of money for communal use. 2 pool in some card-games. [origin unknown] 2.  n. (pl. -ies) childish name for a kitten or cat.
Knead  v. 1 a work into a dough, paste, etc. By pummelling. B make (bread, pottery, etc.) Thus. 2 massage (muscles etc.) As if kneading. [old english]
Knoll  n. Hillock, mound. [old english]
Kopek  (also kopeck) var. Of *copeck.
Kraut  n. Slang offens. German. [shortening of *sauerkraut]
Krill  n. Tiny planktonic crustaceans. [norwegian kril tiny fish]
Krona  n. 1 (pl. Kronor) chief monetary unit of sweden. 2 (pl. Kronur) chief monetary unit of iceland. [swedish and icelandic, = *crown]
Kudos  n. Colloq. Glory; renown. [greek]
Kufic  (also cufic) n. Early angular form of the arabic alphabet used esp. In decorative inscriptions. adj. Of or in this script. [from kufa, city in iraq]
Ladle  n. Deep long-handled spoon used for serving liquids. v. (-ling) (often foll. By out) transfer (liquid) with a ladle. [old english]
Lager  n. A kind of light effervescent beer. [german, = store]
Laity  n. Lay people, as distinct from the clergy. [from *lay2]
Largo  mus. adv. & adj. In a slow tempo and dignified style. n. (pl. -s) largo passage or movement. [italian, = broad]
Laser  n. Device that generates an intense beam of coherent light, or other electromagnetic radiation, in one direction. [light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation]
Lease  n. Contract by which the owner of property allows another to use it for a specified time, usu. In return for payment. v. (-sing) grant or take on lease.  new lease of (us on) life improved prospect of living, or of use after repair. [anglo-french lesser let, from latin laxo loosen]
Lefty  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. 1 polit. Often derog. Left-winger. 2 left-handed person.
Lento  mus. adj. Slow. adv. Slowly. [italian]
Leper  n. 1 person with leprosy. 2 person who is shunned. [greek lepros scaly]
Levis  n.pl. (also levi's propr.) Type of (orig. Blue) denim jeans or overalls reinforced with rivets. [levi strauss, name of the manufacturer]
Lifer  n. Slang person serving a life sentence.
Limbo  n. (pl. -s) 1 (in some christian beliefs) supposed abode of the souls of unbaptized infants, and of the just who died before christ. 2 intermediate state or condition of awaiting a decision etc. [latin in limbo: related to *limb2] 2.  n. (pl. -s) w. Indian dance in which the dancer bends backwards to pass under a horizontal bar which is progressively lowered. [w. Indian word, perhaps = *limber1]
Limey  n. (pl. -s) us slang offens. British person (orig. A sailor) or ship. [from *lime2, because of the former enforced consumption of lime juice in the british navy]
Limit  n. 1 point, line, or level beyond which something does not or may not extend or pass. 2 greatest or smallest amount permissible. v. (-t-) 1 set or serve as a limit to. 2 (foll. By to) restrict.  be the limit colloq. Be intolerable. Within limits with some degree of freedom.  limitless adj. [latin limes limit- boundary, frontier]
Lingo  n. (pl. -s or -es) colloq. 1 foreign language. 2 vocabulary of a special subject or group. [probably from portuguese lingoa from latin lingua tongue]
Links  n.pl. (treated as sing. Or pl.) Golf-course. [old english, = rising ground]
Lipid  n. Any of a group of fatlike substances that are insoluble in water but soluble in organic solvents, including fatty acids, oils, waxes, and steroids. [greek lipos fat]
Lisle  n. Fine cotton thread for stockings etc. [lille in france]
Liter  n. (brit. Litre) metric unit of capacity equal to 1 cubic decimetre (1.76 pints). [greek litra]
Litho  colloq. n. = *lithography. v. (-oes, -oed) lithograph. [abbreviation]
Locus  n. (pl. Loci) 1 position or locality. 2 line or curve etc. Formed by all the points satisfying certain conditions, or by the defined motion of a point, line, or surface. [latin, = place]
Logan  n. (in full logan-stone) poised heavy stone rocking at a touch. [= (dial.) Logging, = rocking]
Lolly  n. (pl. -ies) 1 colloq. Lollipop. 2 = *ice lolly. 3 slang money. [abbreviation]
Loner  n. Person or animal that prefers to be alone.
Loser  n. 1 person or thing that loses, esp. A contest (is a bad loser). 2 colloq. Person who regularly fails.
Lough  n. Ir. Lake, arm of the sea. [irish: related to *loch]
Lousy  adj. (-ier, -iest) 1 colloq. Very bad; disgusting; ill (feel lousy). 2 (often foll. By with) colloq. Well supplied, teeming. 3 infested with lice.  lousily adv. Lousiness n.
Lovat  n. & adj. Muted green. [lovat in scotland]
Lucre  n. Derog. Financial gain. [latin lucrum gain]
Lupin  n. Cultivated plant with long tapering spikes of flowers. [related to *lupine]
Lurex  n. Propr. 1 type of yarn incorporating a glittering metallic thread. 2 fabric made from this.
Lycra  n. Propr. Elastic polyurethane fabric used esp. For sportswear.
Lyric  adj. 1 (of poetry) expressing the writer's emotions, usu. Briefly and in stanzas. 2 (of a poet) writing in this manner. 3 meant or fit to be sung, songlike. n. 1 lyric poem. 2 (in pl.) Words of a song. [latin: related to *lyre]
Mccoy  n.  the real mccoy colloq. The real thing; the genuine article. [origin uncertain]
Mafia  n. 1 organized body of criminals, orig. In sicily, now also in italy and the us. 2 (mafia) group regarded as exerting an intimidating and corrupt power. [italian dial., = bragging]
Magic  n. 1 a supposed art of influencing or controlling events supernaturally. B witchcraft. 2 conjuring tricks. 3 inexplicable influence. 4 enchanting quality or phenomenon. adj. 1 of magic. 2 producing surprising results. 3 colloq. Wonderful, exciting. v. (-ck-) change or create by or as if by magic.  like magic very rapidly. Magic away cause to disappear as if by magic.  [greek magikos: related to *magus]
Magus  n. (pl. Magi) 1 priest of ancient persia. 2 sorcerer. 3 (the magi) the wise men from the east (matt. 2:112). [persian magus]
Major  adj. 1 relatively great in size, intensity, scope, or importance. 2 (of surgery) serious. 3 mus. A (of a scale) having intervals of a semitone above its third and seventh notes. B (of an interval) greater by a semitone than a minor interval (major third). C (of a key) based on a major scale. 4 of full legal age. n. 1  a army officer next below lieutenant-colonel. B officer in charge of a band section (drum major). 2 person of full legal age. 3 us a student's main subject or course. B student of this. v. (foll. By in) us study or qualify in (a subject) as one's main subject. [latin, comparative of magnus great]
Malay  n. 1  member of a people predominating in malaysia and indonesia. 2  their language. adj. Of this people or language.  malayan n. & adj.  [malay malayu]
Mamba  n. Venomous african snake. [zulu imamba]
Mambo  n. (pl. -s) latin american dance like the rumba. [american spanish]
Marge  n. Colloq. Margarine. [abbreviation]
Maser  n. Device used to amplify or generate coherent electromagnetic radiation in the microwave range. [microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation]
Matey  (also maty) adj. (-tier, -tiest) sociable; familiar, friendly. n. (pl. -s) colloq. (as a form of address) mate.  mateyness n. (also matiness). Matily adv.
Maths  n. Colloq. Mathematics. [abbreviation]
Mayor  n. 1 head of the corporation of a city or borough. 2 head of a district council with the status of a borough.  mayoral adj. [latin: related to *major]
Means  n.pl. 1 (often treated as sing.) Action, agent, device, or method producing a result (means of quick travel). 2 a money resources (live beyond one's means). B wealth (man of means).  by all means certainly. By means of by the agency etc. Of. By no means certainly not. [from *mean3]
Mecca  n. Place one aspires to visit. [mecca, muslim holy city in arabia]
Melee  n. (brit. Melee) 1 confused fight, skirmish, or scuffle. 2 muddle. [french: related to *medley]
Melee  n. (us melee) 1 confused fight, skirmish, or scuffle. 2 muddle. [french: related to *medley]
Meths  n. Colloq. Methylated spirit. [abbreviation]
Metro  n. (pl. -s) underground railway system, esp. In paris. [french shortened from metropolitain metropolitan]
Mezzo  mus. adv. Half, moderately. n. (in full mezzo-soprano) (pl. -s) 1 female singing-voice between soprano and contralto. 2 singer with this voice. [latin medius middle]
Miaow  n. Characteristic cry of a cat. v. Make this cry. [imitative]
Micro  n. (pl. -s) colloq. 1 = *microcomputer. 2 = *microprocessor.
Might  past of *may, used esp.: 1 in reported speech, expressing possibility (said he might come) or permission (asked if i might leave) (cf. *may 1, 2). 2 (foll. By perfect infin.) Expressing a possibility based on a condition not fulfilled (if you'd looked you might have found it). 3 (foll. By present infin. Or perfect infin.) Expressing complaint that an obligation or expectation is not or has not been fulfilled (they might have asked). 4 expressing a request (you might call in at the butcher's). 5 colloq. A = *may 1 (it might be true). B (in tentative questions) = *may 2 (might i have the pleasure of this dance?). C = *may 1 d (who might you be?).  might as well expressing lukewarm acquiescence (might as well try). 2.  n. Strength, power.  with might and main with all one's power. [old english: related to *may]
Miler  n. Colloq. Person or horse specializing in races of one mile.
Minus  prep. 1 with the subtraction of (7 minus 4 equals 3). 2 below zero (minus 2). 3 colloq. Lacking (returned minus their dog). adj. 1 math. Negative. 2 electronics having a negative charge. n. 1 = *minus sign. 2 math. Negative quantity. 3 colloq. Disadvantage. [latin, neuter of *minor]
Mirth  n. Merriment, laughter.  mirthful adj. [old english: related to *merry]
Miter  (brit. Mitre) n. 1 tall deeply-cleft headdress worn by bishops and abbots, esp. As a symbol of office. 2 joint of two pieces of wood etc. At an angle of 90, such that the line of junction bisects this angle. v. (-ring) 1 bestow a mitre on. 2 join with a mitre. [greek mitra turban]
Mizen  n. (also mizzen) (in full mizen-sail) lowest fore-and-aft sail of a fully rigged ship's mizen-mast. [italian: related to *mezzanine]
Modal  adj. 1 of mode or form, not of substance. 2 gram. A of the mood of a verb. B (of an auxiliary verb, e.g. Would) used to express the mood of another verb. 3 mus. Denoting a style of music using a particular mode. [latin: related to *mode]
Modem  n. Combined device for modulation and demodulation, e.g. Between a computer and a telephone line. [portmanteau word]
Momma  n. Us colloq. Mother. [var. Of *mama]
Mommy  n. (pl. -ies) esp. Us colloq. = *mummy1.
Moody  adj. (-ier, -iest) given to changes of mood; gloomy, sullen. n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Bad mood; tantrum.  moodily adv. Moodiness n. [related to *mood1]
Moped  n. Two-wheeled low-powered motor vehicle with pedals. [swedish: related to *motor, *pedal]
Mores  n.pl. Customs or conventions of a community. [latin, pl. Of mos custom]
Moron  n. 1 colloq. Very stupid person. 2 adult with a mental age of 812.  moronic adj. [greek moros foolish]
Morse  n. (in full morse code) code in which letters are represented by combinations of long and short light or sound signals. v. (-sing) signal by morse code. [morse, name of an electrician]
Motel  n. Roadside hotel for motorists. [from motor hotel]
Motet  n. Mus. Short religious choral work. [french: related to *mot]
Motif  n. 1 theme that is repeated and developed in an artistic work. 2 decorative design or pattern. 3 ornament sewn separately on a garment. [french: related to *motive]
Mourn  v. (often foll. By for, over) feel or show deep sorrow or regret for (a dead person, a lost thing, a past event, etc.). [old english]
Movie  n. Esp. Us colloq. Cinema film.
Mufti  n. Civilian clothes (in mufti). [arabic]
Mumps  n.pl. (treated as sing.) Infectious disease with swelling of the neck and face. [imitative of mouth-shape]
Munch  v. Eat steadily with a marked action of the jaws. [imitative]
Mural  n. Painting executed directly on a wall. adj. Of, on, or like a wall. [latin murus wall]
Muzak  n. 1 propr. System of piped music used in public places. 2 (muzak) recorded light background music. [fanciful var. Of *music]
Nacho  n. (pl. -s) tortilla chip, usu. Topped with melted cheese and spices etc. [origin uncertain]
Nancy  n. (pl. -ies) (in full nancy boy) slang offens. Effeminate man, esp. A homosexual. [pet form of ann]
Navel  n. Depression in the centre of the belly marking the site of attachment of the umbilical cord. [old english]
Neddy  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. 1 donkey. 2 (neddy) = *nedc. [pet form of edward]
Neigh  n. Cry of a horse. v. Make a neigh. [old english]
Nevus  n. (brit. Naevus) (pl. Naevi) 1 raised red birthmark. 2 = *mole2. [latin]
Nexus  n. (pl. Same) connected group or series. [latin necto nex- bind]
Nimby  adj. Objecting to the siting of unpleasant developments in one's own locality. n. (pl. -ies) person who so objects. [not in my back yard]
Ninny  n. (pl. -ies) foolish person. [origin uncertain]
Niter  n. (brit. Nitre) saltpetre. [greek nitron]
Nitre  n. (us niter) saltpetre. [greek nitron]
Nomen  n. Ancient roman's second or family name, as in marcus tullius cicero. [latin, = name]
Nonce  n.  for the nonce for the time being; for the present occasion. [from for than anes = for the one]
Norse  n. 1 norwegian language. 2 scandinavian language-group. adj. Of ancient scandinavia, esp. Norway.  norseman n. [dutch noor(d)sch northern]
Novel  n. Fictitious prose story of book length. [latin novus new] 2.  adj. Of a new kind or nature. [latin novus new]
Nylon  n. 1 tough light elastic synthetic fibre. 2 nylon fabric. 3 (in pl.) Stockings of nylon. [invented word]
Ocher  n. (brit. Ochre) 1 earth used as yellow, brown, or red pigment. 2 pale brownish-yellow colour.  ochreous adj. [greek okhra]
Odour  n. (us odor) 1 smell or fragrance. 2 quality or trace (an odour of intolerance). 3 regard, repute (in bad odour).  odorous adj. Odourless adj. [latin odor]
Offal  n. 1 less valuable edible parts of a carcass, esp. The heart, liver, etc. 2 refuse, scraps. [dutch afval: related to *off, *fall]
Offer  v. 1 present for acceptance, refusal, or consideration. 2 (foll. By to + infin.) Express readiness or show intention. 3 provide; give an opportunity for. 4 make available for sale. 5 present to the attention. 6 present (a sacrifice etc.). 7 present itself; occur (as opportunity offers). 8 attempt (violence, resistance, etc.). n. 1 expression of readiness to do or give if desired, or to buy or sell. 2 amount offered. 3 proposal (esp. Of marriage). 4 bid.  on offer for sale at a certain (esp. Reduced) price. [latin offero oblat-]
Ogive  n. 1 pointed arch. 2 diagonal rib of a vault. [french]
Okapi  n. (pl. Same or -s) african giraffe-like mammal but with a shorter neck and striped body. [mbuba]
Oldie  n. Colloq. Old person or thing.
Oomph  n. Slang 1 energy, enthusiasm. 2 attractiveness, esp. Sex appeal. [origin uncertain]
Optic  adj.  Of the eye or sight (optic nerve). [greek optos seen]
Oscar  n. Any of the statuettes awarded by the us academy of motion picture arts and sciences for excellence in film acting, directing, etc. [man's name]
Ought  v.aux. (as present and past, the only form now in use) 1 expressing duty or rightness (we ought to be thankful; it ought to have been done long ago). 2 advisability (you ought to see a dentist). 3 probability (it ought to rain soon).  ought not negative form of ought (he ought not to have stolen it). [old english, past of *owe]
Ouija  n. (in full ouija board) propr. Board marked with letters or signs and used with a movable pointer to try to obtain messages at a seance. [french oui, german ja, yes]
Ouzel  n. (also ousel) 1 (in full ring ouzel) white-breasted thrush. 2 (in full water ouzel) diving bird; dipper. [old english, = blackbird]
Paddy  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Often offens. Irishman. [irish padraig patrick] 2.  n. (pl. -ies) 1 (in full paddy-field) field where rice is grown. 2 rice before threshing or in the husk. [malay] 3.n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Rage; fit of temper. [from *paddy]
Padre  n. Chaplain in the army etc. [italian, spanish, and portuguese, = father, priest]
Pager  n. Bleeping radio device, calling its wearer to the telephone etc.
Panto  n. (pl. -s) colloq. = *pantomime 1. [abbreviation]
Pants  n.pl. 1 underpants or knickers. 2 us trousers.  bore (or scare etc.) The pants off colloq. Bore, scare, etc., greatly. With one's pants down colloq. In an embarrassingly unprepared state. [abbreviation of *pantaloons]
Parka  n. 1 long usu. Green anorak with fur round the hood. 2 hooded skin jacket worn by eskimos. [aleutian]
Party  n. (pl. -ies) 1 social gathering, usu. Of invited guests. 2 people working or travelling together (search party). 3 political group putting forward candidates in elections and usu. Organized on a national basis. 4 each side in an agreement or dispute. 5 (foll. By to) law accessory (to an action). 6 colloq. Person. v. (-ies, -ied) attend a party; celebrate. [romanic: related to *part]
Pasta  n. Dried flour paste in various shapes (e.g. Lasagne or spaghetti). [italian: related to *paste]
Pater  n. Colloq. Father. [latin]
Patty  n. (pl. -ies) little pie or pasty. [french *pate, after *pasty1]
Peace  n. 1 a quiet; tranquillity. B mental calm; serenity. 2 a (often attrib.) Freedom from or the cessation of war (peace talks). B (esp. Peace) treaty of peace between states etc. At war. 3 freedom from civil disorder.  at peace 1 in a state of friendliness. 2 serene. 3 euphem. Dead. Hold one's peace keep silent. Keep the peace prevent, or refrain from, strife. Make one's peace (often foll. By with) re-establish friendly relations. Make peace agree to end a war or quarrel. [latin pax pac-]
Pease  n.pl. Archaic peas. [latin pisa]
Pedal  n. Lever or key operated by foot, esp. In a vehicle, on a bicycle, or on some musical instruments (e.g. The organ). v. (-ll-; us -l-) 1 operate the pedals of a bicycle, organ, etc. 2 propel (a bicycle etc.) With the pedals. adj. Of the foot or feet. [latin pes ped- foot]
Peeve  colloq. v. (-ving) (usu. As peeved adj.) Irritate, annoy. n. Cause or state of irritation. [back-formation from *peevish]
Penal  adj. 1 of or concerning punishment or its infliction. 2 (of an offence) punishable, esp. By law.  penally adv. [latin poena *pain]
Pence  pl. Of *penny.
Perry  n. (pl. -ies) drink made from fermented pear juice. [french pere: related to *pear]
Phone  n. & v. (-ning) colloq. = *telephone. [abbreviation]
Phony  var. Of *phoney.
Photo  n. (pl. -s) = *photograph n. [abbreviation]
Photo-  comb. Form denoting: 1 light. 2 photography. [greek phos phot- light]
Piano  n. (pl. -s) keyboard instrument with metal strings struck by hammers. [italian, abbreviation of *pianoforte] 2.  mus. adj. Soft. adv. Softly. n. (pl. -s or -ni) soft playing or passage. [latin planus flat, (of sound) soft]
Piggy  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Little pig. adj. (-ier, -iest) 1 like a pig. 2 (of features etc.) Like those of a pig.
Pigmy  var. Of *pygmy.
Pilau  n. (also pilaff, pilaf) middle eastern or indian dish of rice boiled with meat, vegetables, spices, etc. [turkish]
Pinny  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Pinafore. [abbreviation]
Pinta  n. Colloq. Pint of milk. [corruption of pint of]
Piste  n. Ski-run of compacted snow. [french, = racetrack]
Piton  n. Peg driven into rock or a crack to support a climber or rope. [french]
Pixel  n. Any of the minute areas of uniform illumination of which an image on a display screen is composed. [abbreviation of picture element]
Pizza  n. Italian dish of a layer of dough baked with a topping of tomatoes, cheese, etc. [italian, = pie]
Plain  adj. 1 clear, evident. 2 readily understood, simple. 3 (of food, decoration, etc.) Simple. 4 not beautiful or distinguished-looking. 5 outspoken; straightforward. 6 unsophisticated; not luxurious (a plain man; plain living). adv. 1 clearly. 2 simply. n. 1 level tract of country. 2 basic knitting stitch.  plainly adv. Plainness n. [latin planus]
Plane  n. 1 flat surface such that a straight line joining any two points on it lies wholly in it. 2 level surface. 3 colloq. = *aeroplane. 4 flat surface producing lift by the action of air or water over and under it (usu. In comb.: hydroplane). 5 (often foll. By of) level of attainment, knowledge, etc. adj. 1 (of a surface etc.) Perfectly level. 2 (of an angle, figure, etc.) Lying in a plane. v. (-ning) glide. [latin planus *plain] 2.  n. Tool for smoothing a usu. Wooden surface by paring shavings from it. v. (-ning) 1 smooth with a plane. 2 (often foll. By away, down) pare with a plane. [latin: related to *plane1] 3.  n. Tall tree with maple-like leaves and bark which peels in uneven patches. [greek platanos]
Pleat  n. Fold or crease, esp. A flattened fold in cloth doubled upon itself. v. Make a pleat or pleats in. [from *plait]
Plonk  v. 1 set down hurriedly or clumsily. 2 (usu. Foll. By down) set down firmly. n. Heavy thud. [imitative] 2.  n. Colloq. Cheap or inferior wine. [origin unknown]
Plume  n. 1 feather, esp. A large one used for ornament. 2 ornament of feathers etc. Worn on a helmet or hat or in the hair. 3 something resembling this (plume of smoke). v. (-ming) 1 decorate or provide with a plume or plumes. 2 refl. (foll. By on, upon) pride (oneself on esp. Something trivial). 3 (of a bird) preen (itself or its feathers). [latin pluma]
Polio  n. = *poliomyelitis. [abbreviation]
Pommy  n. (also pommie) (pl. -ies) austral. & nz slang offens. British person, esp. A recent immigrant. [origin uncertain]
Ponce  slang n. 1 man who lives off a prostitute's earnings; pimp. 2 offens. Homosexual or effeminate man. v. (-cing) act as a ponce.  ponce about move about effeminately or ineffectually. [origin unknown]
Pools  n.pl. (prec. By the) = *football pool.
Posse  n. 1 strong force or company. 2 body of law-enforcers. [latin, = be able]
Potty  adj. (-ier, -iest) slang 1 foolish, crazy. 2 insignificant, trivial.  pottiness n. [origin unknown] 2.  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Chamber-pot, esp. For a child.
Prang   slang v. 1 crash (an aircraft or vehicle). 2 damage by impact. 3 bomb (a target) successfully. n. Act of pranging. [imitative]
Prate  v. (-ting) 1 chatter; talk too much. 2 talk foolishly or irrelevantly. n. Prating; idle talk. [low german or dutch]
Primp  v. 1 make (the hair, clothes, etc.) Tidy. 2 refl. Make (oneself) smart. [var. Of *prim]
Prink  v. 1 a (usu. Refl.; often foll. By up) smarten (oneself) up. B dress oneself up. 2 (of a bird) preen. [origin unknown]
Prior  adj. 1 earlier. 2 (often foll. By to) coming before in time, order, or importance. adv. (foll. By to) before (left prior to his arrival). n. (fem. Prioress) 1 superior of a religious house or order. 2 (in an abbey) deputy of an abbot. [latin, = earlier]
Proem  n. Preface etc. To a book or speech. [latin from greek]
Promo  n. (pl. -s) colloq. 1 (often attrib.) Promotion, advertising (promo video). 2 promotional video, trailer, etc. [abbreviation]
Provo  n. (pl. -s) colloq. Provisional. [abbreviation]
Prowl  v. (often foll. By about, around) roam (a place) esp. Stealthily or restlessly or in search of prey, plunder, etc. n. Act of prowling.  on the prowl prowling.  prowler n. [origin unknown]
Prude  n. Excessively (often affectedly) squeamish or sexually modest person.  prudery n. Prudish adj. Prudishly adv. Prudishness n. [french: related to *proud]
Pseud  colloq. adj. (esp. Intellectually) pretentious; not genuine. n. Such a person; poseur. [from *pseudo-]
Psych  v. Colloq. 1 (usu. Foll. By up; often refl.) Prepare (oneself or another) mentally for an ordeal etc. 2 (often foll. By out) intimidate or frighten (a person), esp. For one's own advantage. 3 (usu. Foll. By out) analyse (a person's motivation etc.) For one's own advantage (can't psych him out). [abbreviation]
Pubis  n. (pl. Pubes) either of a pair of bones forming the two sides of the pelvis. [latin os pubis bone of the *pubes1]
Purge  v. (-ging) 1 (often foll. By of, from) make physically or spiritually clean. 2 remove by cleansing. 3 rid (an organization, party, etc.) Of unacceptable members. 4 a empty (the bowels). B empty the bowels of (a person). 5 law atone for (an offence, esp. Contempt of court). n. 1 act of purging. 2 purgative. [latin purgo purify]
Pyrex  n. Propr. Hard heat-resistant glass, used esp. For ovenware. [invented word]
Quake  v. (-king) shake, tremble. n. Colloq. Earthquake. [old english]
Quark  n. Physics component of elementary particles. [word used by joyce in finnegans wake (1939)] 2.  n. A kind of low-fat curd cheese. [german]
Quash  v. 1 annul; reject as invalid, esp. By a legal procedure. 2 suppress, crush. [french quasser from latin]
Queue  n. Line or sequence of persons, vehicles, etc. Waiting their turn. v. (queues, queued, queuing or queueing) (often foll. By up) form or join a queue. [latin cauda tail]
Quiff  n.  1 man's tuft of hair, brushed upward over the forehead. 2 curl plastered down on the forehead. [origin unknown]
Quota  n. 1 share to be contributed to, or received from, a total. 2 number of goods, people, etc., stipulated or permitted. [latin quotus from quot how many]
Quote  v. (-ting) 1 cite or appeal to (an author, book, etc.) In confirmation of some view. 2 a repeat or copy out a passage from. B (foll. By from) cite (an author, book, etc.). 3 (foll. By as) cite (an author etc.) As proof, evidence, etc. 4 a enclose (words) in quotation marks. B (as int.) Verbal formula indicating opening quotation marks (he said, quote, i shall stay). 5 (often foll. By at, also absol.) State the price of. n. Colloq. 1 passage quoted. 2 price quoted. 3 (usu. In pl.) Quotation marks. [latin quoto mark with numbers]
Rabbi  n. (pl. -s) 1 jewish scholar or teacher, esp. Of the law. 2 jewish religious leader.  rabbinical adj. [hebrew, = my master]
Radar  n. 1 system for detecting the direction, range, or presence of objects, by sending out pulses of high frequency electromagnetic waves which they reflect. 2 apparatus for this. [from radio detection and ranging]
Radii  pl. Of *radius.
Radio  n. (pl. -s) 1 (often attrib.) A transmission and reception of sound messages etc. By electromagnetic waves of radio frequency. B apparatus for receiving, broadcasting, or transmitting radio signals. 2 a sound broadcasting (prefers the radio). B broadcasting station or channel (radio one). v. (-es, -ed) 1 a send (a message) by radio. B send a message to (a person) by radio. 2 communicate or broadcast by radio. [short for radio-telegraphy etc.]
Radon  n. Gaseous radioactive inert element arising from the disintegration of radium.
Raise  v. (-sing) 1 put or take into a higher position. 2 (often foll. By up) cause to rise or stand up or be vertical. 3 increase the amount, value, or strength of. 4 (often foll. By up) construct or build up. 5 levy, collect, or bring together (raise money). 6 cause to be heard or considered (raise an objection). 7 set going or bring into being (raise hopes). 8 bring up, educate. 9 breed, grow. 10 promote to a higher rank. 11 (foll. By to) multiply a quantity to a power. 12 cause (bread) to rise. 13 cards bet more than (another player). 14 end (a siege etc.). 15 remove (a barrier etc.). 16 cause (a ghost etc.) To appear. 17 colloq. Get hold of, find. 18 rouse from sleep or death, or from a lair. n. 1 cards increase in a stake or bid. 2 esp. Us increase in salary.  raise cain colloq. = raise the roof. Raise one's eyebrows see *eyebrow. Raise from the dead restore to life. Raise a laugh cause others to laugh. Raise the roof be very angry; cause an uproar. [old norse]
Rally  v. (-ies, -ied) 1 (often foll. By round) bring or come together as support or for action. 2 bring or come together again after a rout or dispersion. 3 recover after illness etc., revive. 4 revive (courage etc.). 5 (of share-prices etc.) Increase after a fall. n. (pl. -ies) 1 rallying or being rallied. 2 mass meeting of supporters or persons with a common interest. 3 competition for motor vehicles, mainly over public roads. 4 (in tennis etc.) Extended exchange of strokes. [french rallier: related to *re-, *ally] 2.  v. (-ies, -ied) ridicule good-humouredly. [french railler: related to *rail2]
Ranee  n. (also rani) (pl. -s) hist. Raja's wife or widow. [hindi]
Rapid  adj. (-er, -est) 1 quick, swift. 2 acting or completed in a short time. 3 (of a slope) descending steeply. n. (usu. In pl.) Steep descent in a river-bed, with a swift current.  rapidity n. Rapidly adv. Rapidness n.  [latin: related to *rape1]
Ravel  v. (-ll-; us -l-) 1 entangle or become entangled. 2 fray out. 3 (often foll. By out) disentangle, unravel, separate into threads. [probably dutch ravelen]
Raver  n. Colloq. Uninhibited pleasure-loving person.
Rayon  n. Textile fibre or fabric made from cellulose. [from *ray1]
Razor  n. Instrument with a sharp blade used in cutting hair, esp. Shaving. [french rasor: related to *raze]
Rebel  n. 1 person who fights against, resists, or refuses allegiance to, the established government. 2 person or thing that resists authority or control. attrib. Adj. 1 rebellious. 2 of rebels. 3 in rebellion. v. (-ll-; us -l-) (usu. Foll. By against) 1 act as a rebel; revolt. 2 feel or display repugnance. [latin: related to *re-, bellum war]
Rebid  v. (-dd-; past and past part. Rebid) bid again. n. 1 act of rebidding. 2 bid so made.
Recap  colloq. v. (-pp-) recapitulate. n. Recapitulation. [abbreviation]
Recce  colloq. n. Reconnaissance. v. (recced, recceing) reconnoitre. [abbreviation]
Recto  n. (pl. -s) 1 right-hand page of an open book. 2 front of a printed leaf. [latin, = on the right]
Recur  v. (-rr-) 1 occur again; be repeated. 2 (foll. By to) go back in thought or speech. 3 (as recurring adj.) (of a decimal fraction) with the same figure(s) repeated indefinitely (1.66 recurring). [latin curro run]
Refit  v. (-tt-) esp. Naut. Make or become serviceable again by repairs, renewals, etc. n. Refitting.
Reich  n. The former german state, esp. The third reich. [german, = empire]
Remit  v. (-tt-) 1 cancel or refrain from exacting or inflicting (a debt, punishment, etc.). 2 abate or slacken; cease partly or entirely. 3 send (money etc.) In payment. 4 a (foll. By to) refer (a matter for decision etc.) To some authority. B send back (a case) to a lower court. 5 postpone or defer. 6 pardon (sins etc.). n. 1 terms of reference of a committee etc. 2 item remitted for consideration. [latin remitto -miss-]
Remix  v. Mix again. n. Remixed recording.
Repel  v. (-ll-) 1 drive back; ward off (repel an attacker). 2 refuse to accept (repelled offers of help). 3 be repulsive or distasteful to. 4 resist mixing with or admitting (oil and water repel each other; surface repels moisture). 5 (of a magnetic pole) push away from itself (like poles repel).  repellent adj. & n. [latin repello -puls-]
Reply  v. (-ies, -ied) 1 (often foll. By to) make an answer, respond in word or action. 2 say in answer. n. (pl. -ies) 1 replying (what did they say in reply?). 2 what is replied; response. [latin replico fold back]
Repro  n. (pl. -s) (often attrib.) Colloq. Reproduction or copy. [abbreviation]
Rerun  v. (-nn-; past reran; past part. Rerun) 1 run (a race, film, etc.) Again. 2 repeat (a course of action). n. 1 act of rerunning. 2 film etc. Shown again. 3 repetition (of events).
Resit  v. (-tt-; past and past part. Resat) sit (an examination) again after failing. n. 1 resitting of an examination. 2 examination specifically for this.
Retch  v. Make a motion of vomiting, esp. Involuntarily and without effect. [old english]
Retro  slang adj. Reviving or harking back to the past. n. Retro fashion or style.
Retry  v. (-ies, -ied) try (a defendant or lawsuit) a second or further time.
Reuse  v. (-sing) use again. n. Second or further use.  reusable adj.
Revel  v. (-ll-; us -l-) 1 have a good time; be extravagantly festive. 2 (foll. By in) take keen delight in. n. (in sing. Or pl.) Revelling.  reveller n. Revelry n. (pl. -ies). [latin: related to *rebel]
Revue  n. Entertainment of short usu. Satirical sketches and songs. [french: related to *review]
Right  adj. 1 (of conduct etc.) Just, morally or socially correct (do the right thing). 2 true, correct (which is the right way?). 3 suitable or preferable (right person for the job). 4 sound or normal; healthy; satisfactory (engine doesn't sound right). 5 on or towards the east side of the human body, or of any object etc., when facing north. 6 (of a side of fabric etc.) Meant for display or use. 7 colloq. Real; complete (made a right mess of it). 8 (also right) polit. Of the right. n. 1 that which is correct or just; fair treatment (often in pl.: rights and wrongs of the case). 2 justification or fair claim (has no right to speak). 3 legal or moral entitlement; authority to act (human rights; right of reply). 4 right-hand part, region, or direction. 5 boxing a right hand. B blow with this. 6 (often right) a conservative political group or section. B conservatives collectively. 7 side of a stage to the right of a person facing the audience. v. 1 (often refl.) Restore to a proper, straight, or vertical position. 2 correct or avenge (mistakes, wrongs, etc.); set in order; make reparation. adv. 1 straight (go right on). 2 colloq. Immediately (do it right now). 3 a (foll. By to, round, through, etc.) All the way (sank right to the bottom). B (foll. By off, out, etc.) Completely (came right off its hinges). 4 exactly, quite (right in the middle). 5 justly, properly, correctly, truly, satisfactorily (not holding it right; if i remember right). 6 on or to the right side. int. Colloq. Expressing agreement or assent.   by right (or rights) if right were done. Do right by act dutifully towards (a person). In one's own right through one's own position or effort etc. In the right having justice or truth on one's side. In one's right mind sane. Of (or as of) right having legal or moral etc. Entitlement. On the right side of colloq. 1 in the favour of (a person etc.). 2 somewhat less than (a specified age). Put (or set) right 1 restore to order, health, etc. 2 correct the mistaken impression etc. Of (a person). Put (or set) to rights make correct or well ordered. Right away (or off) immediately. Right oh! (or ho!) = *righto. Right on! Slang expression of strong approval or encouragement. A right one colloq. Foolish or funny person. Right you are! Colloq. Exclamation of assent. Too right slang expression of agreement.  rightness n. [old english]
Rinse  v. (-sing) (often foll. By through, out) 1 wash or treat with clean water etc. 2 wash lightly. 3 put (clothes etc.) Through clean water after washing. 4 (foll. By out, away) clear (impurities) by rinsing. n. 1 rinsing (give it a rinse). 2 temporary hair tint (blue rinse). [french rincer]
Ripen  v. Make or become ripe.
Robot  n. 1 machine resembling or functioning like a human. 2 machine automatically completing a mechanical process. 3 person who acts mechanically.  robotic adj. Robotize v. (also -ise) (-zing or -sing). [czech]
Rodeo  n. (pl. -s) 1 exhibition of cowboys' skills in handling animals. 2 round-up of cattle on a ranch for branding etc. [spanish]
Romeo  n. (pl. -s) passionate male lover or seducer. [name of a character in shakespeare]
Roost  n. Branch or perch for a bird, esp. To sleep. v. Settle for rest or sleep.  come home to roost (of a scheme etc.) Recoil unfavourably. [old english hrost]
Rotor  n. 1 rotary part of a machine. 2 rotary aerofoil on a helicopter, providing lift. [related to *rotate]
Rouse  v. (-sing) 1 (cause to) wake. 2 (often foll. By up, often refl.) Stir up, make or become active or excited (was roused to protest). 3 anger (terrible when roused). 4 evoke (feelings). [origin unknown]
Rover  n. Wanderer. 2.  n. Pirate. [low german or dutch]
Rowan  n. (in full rowan-tree) 1 scot. & n.engl. Mountain ash. 2 (in full rowan-berry) its scarlet berry. [scandinavian]
Rugby  n. (in full rugby football) team game played with an oval ball that may be kicked or carried. [rugby school, where it was first played]
Rumba  n. 1 latin american ballroom dance orig. From cuba. 2 music for this. [american spanish]
Rummy  n. Card-game played usu. With two packs. [origin unknown]
Saber  n. (brit. Sabre) 1 curved cavalry sword. 2 light tapering fencing-sword. [french from german sabel]
Sadhu  n. (in india) holy man, sage, or ascetic. [sanskrit]
Sahib  n. Hist. (in india) form of address to european man. [arabic, = lord]
Sally  (pl. -ies) n. 1 sudden military charge; sortie. 2 excursion. 3 witticism. v. (-ies, -ied) 1 (usu. Foll. By out, forth) set out on a walk, journey, etc. 2 (usu. Foll. By out) make a military sally. [french saillie from latin salio leap]
Salsa  n. A kind of dance music of cuban origin, with jazz and rock elements. [spanish: related to *sauce]
Samba  n. 1 ballroom dance of brazilian origin. 2 music for this. v. (-bas, -baed or -ba'd, -baing) dance the samba. [portuguese]
Sarge  n. Slang sergeant. [abbreviation]
Sauna  n. 1 period spent in a special room heated very hot, to clean the body. 2 such a room. [finnish]
Saute  attrib. Adj. (esp. Of potatoes) fried quickly in a little fat. n. Food so cooked. v. (sauted or sauteed) cook in this way. [french sauter jump]
Saver  n. 1 person who saves esp. Money. 2 (often in comb.) Thing that saves (time etc.). 3 cheap (esp. Off-peak) fare.
Savor  (brit. Savour) n. 1 characteristic taste, flavour, etc. 2 hint of a different quality etc. In something. v. 1 appreciate and enjoy (food, an experience, etc.). 2 (foll. By of) imply or suggest (a specified quality). [latin sapor]
Savvy  slang v. (-ies, -ied) know. n. Knowingness; understanding. adj. (-ier, -iest) us knowing; wise. [pidgin alteration of spanish sabe usted you know]
Scamp  n. Colloq. Rascal; rogue. [probably dutch]
Scaur  var. Of *scar2.
Scoot  v. (esp. In imper.) Colloq. Depart quickly, flee. [origin unknown]
Scots  (also scotch) esp. Scot. adj. 1 = *scottish adj. 2 in the dialect, accent, etc., of (esp. Lowlands) scotland. n. 1 = *scottish n. 2 form of english spoken in (esp. Lowlands) scotland. [var. Of *scottish]
Scour  v. 1 a cleanse by rubbing. B (usu. Foll. By away, off, etc.) Clear (rust, stains, etc.) By rubbing etc. 2 clear out (a pipe, channel, etc.) By flushing through. n. Scouring or being scoured.  scourer n. [french escurer] 2.  v. Search thoroughly, esp. By scanning (scoured the streets for him; scoured the newspaper). [origin unknown]
Scram  v. (-mm-) (esp. In imper.) Colloq. Go away. [perhaps from *scramble]
Scrap  n. 1 small detached piece; fragment. 2 rubbish or waste material. 3 discarded metal for reprocessing (often attrib.: scrap metal). 4 (with neg.) Smallest piece or amount. 5 (in pl.) A odds and ends. B uneaten food. v. (-pp-) discard as useless. [old norse: related to *scrape] 2.  colloq. n. Fight or rough quarrel. v. (-pp-) have a scrap. [perhaps from *scrape]
Scrum  n. 1 scrummage. 2 colloq. = *scrimmage. [abbreviation]
Scuba  n. (pl. -s) aqualung. [acronym of self-contained underwater breathing apparatus]Scuff  v. 1 graze or brush against. 2 mark or wear out (shoes) in this way. 3 shuffle or drag the feet. n. Mark of scuffing. [imitative]
Scull  n. 1 either of a pair of small oars. 2 oar over the stern of a boat to propel it, usu. By a twisting motion. 3 (in pl.) Sculling race. v. (often absol.) Propel (a boat) with sculls. [origin unknown]
Senor  n. (pl. Senores) title used of or to a spanish-speaking man. [spanish from latin senior *senior]
Sense  n. 1 a any of the five bodily faculties transmitting sensation. B sensitiveness of all or any of these (good sense of smell). 2 ability to perceive or feel. 3 (foll. By of) consciousness; awareness (sense of guilt). 4 quick or accurate appreciation, understanding, or instinct (sense of humour). 5 practical wisdom, common sense. 6 a meaning of a word etc. B intelligibility or coherence. 7 prevailing opinion (sense of the meeting). 8 (in pl.) Sanity, ability to think. v. (-sing) 1 perceive by a sense or senses. 2 be vaguely aware of. 3 realize. 4 (of a machine etc.) Detect.  come to one's senses 1 regain consciousness. 2 regain common sense. In a (or one) sense if the statement etc. Is understood in a particular way. Make sense be intelligible or practicable. Make sense of show or find the meaning of. Take leave of one's senses go mad. [latin sensus from sentio sens- feel]
Sepal  n. Division or leaf of a calyx. [perhaps from *separate, *petal]
Serif  n. Slight projection at the extremities of a printed letter (cf. *sanserif). [origin uncertain]
Serve  v. (-ving) 1 do a service for (a person, community, etc.). 2 be a servant to. 3 carry out duties (served on six committees). 4 (foll. By in) be employed in (esp. The armed forces) (served in the navy). 5 a be useful to or serviceable for. B meet requirements; perform a function. 6 a go through a due period of (apprenticeship, a prison sentence, etc.). B go through (a due period) of imprisonment etc. 7 present (food) to eat. 8 (in full serve at table) act as a waiter. 9 a attend to (a customer etc.). B (foll. By with) supply with (goods). 10 treat (a person) in a specified way. 11  a (often foll. By on) deliver (a writ etc.). B (foll. By with) deliver a writ etc. To. 12 (also absol.) (in tennis etc.) Deliver (a ball etc.) To begin or resume play. 13 (of an animal) copulate with (a female). n. = *service n. 16a, b.  serve a person right be a person's deserved punishment etc. Serve up derog. Offer (served up the same old excuses). [latin servio]
Servo  n. (pl. -s) 1 powered mechanism producing motion at a higher level of energy than the input level. 2 (in comb.) Involving this. [latin servus slave]
Shako  n. (pl. -s) cylindrical plumed peaked military hat. [hungarian csako]
Shank  n. 1 a leg. B lower part of the leg. C shin-bone. 2 shaft or stem, esp. The part of a tool etc. Joining the handle to the working end. [old english]
Shark  n. Large voracious marine fish. [origin unknown] 2.  n. Colloq. Swindler, profiteer. [origin unknown]
Shave  v. (-ving; past part. Shaved or (as adj.) Shaven) 1 remove (bristles or hair) with a razor. 2 (also absol.) Remove bristles or hair with a razor from (a person, face, leg, etc.). 3 reduce by a small amount. 4 pare (wood etc.) To shape it. 5 miss or pass narrowly. n. 1 shaving or being shaved. 2 narrow miss or escape. 3 tool for shaving wood etc. [old english]
Shear  v. (past sheared; past part. Shorn or sheared) 1  (also absol.) Clip the wool off (a sheep etc.). 2 remove or take off by cutting. 3 cut with scissors or shears etc. 4 (foll. By of) a strip bare. B deprive. 5 (often foll. By off) distort, be distorted, or break, from structural strain. n. 1  strain produced by pressure in the structure of a substance. 2 (in pl.) (also pair of shears sing.) Large scissor-shaped clipping or cutting instrument.  shearer n. [old english]
Sheen  n. 1 gloss or lustre. 2 brightness.  sheeny adj. [old english, = beautiful]
Sheet  n. 1 large rectangle of cotton etc. Used esp. In pairs as inner bedclothes. 2 broad usu. Thin flat piece of paper, metal, etc. 3 wide expanse of water, ice, flame, falling rain, etc. 4 page of unseparated postage stamps. 5 derog. Newspaper. v. 1 provide or cover with sheets. 2 form into sheets. 3 (of rain etc.) Fall in sheets. [old english] 2.  n. Rope or chain attached to the lower corner of a sail to hold or control it. [old english: related to *sheet1]
Shelf  n. (pl. Shelves) 1 wooden etc. Board projecting from a wall, or as part of a unit, used to store things. 2 a projecting horizontal ledge in a cliff face etc. B reef or sandbank.  on the shelf 1 (of a woman) regarded as too old to hope for marriage. 2 (esp. Of a retired person) put aside as if no longer useful. [low german]
Shift  v. 1 (cause to) change or move from one position to another. 2 remove, esp. With effort. 3 slang a hurry. B consume (food or drink). 4 us change (gear) in a vehicle. n. 1 act of shifting. 2 a relay of workers. B time for which they work. 3 a device, stratagem, or expedient. B trick or evasion. 4 woman's straight unwaisted dress or petticoat. 5 physics displacement of a spectral line. 6 key on a keyboard used to switch between lower and upper case etc. 7 us a gear lever in a vehicle. B mechanism for this.  make shift manage; get along somehow. Shift for oneself rely on one's own efforts. Shift one's ground take up a new position in an argument etc. [old english]
Shirk  v. (also absol.) Avoid (duty, work, etc.).  shirker n. [german schurke scoundrel]
Shove  v. (-ving) 1 (also absol.) Push vigorously. 2 colloq. Put casually (shoved it in a drawer). n. Act of shoving.  shove off 1 start from the shore in a boat. 2 slang depart. [old english]
Shrew  n. 1 small mouselike long-nosed mammal. 2 bad-tempered or scolding woman.  shrewish adj. (in sense 2). [old english]
Shunt  v. 1 move (a train) between sidings etc.; (of a train) be shunted. 2 move or put aside; redirect. n. 1 shunting or being shunted. 2 electr. Conductor joining two points of a circuit, through which current may be diverted. 3 surgery alternative path for the circulation of the blood. 4 slang collision of vehicles, esp. One behind another. [perhaps from *shun]
Shush  int. Hush! v. 1 quieten (a person or people) by saying shush. 2 fall silent. [imitative]
Sibyl  n. Pagan prophetess. [greek sibulla]
Sidle  v. (-ling) (usu. Foll. By along, up) walk timidly or furtively. [shortening of *sidelong]
Sight  n. 1 a faculty of seeing. B act of seeing or being seen. 2 thing seen. 3 opinion (in my sight). 4 range of vision (out of sight). 5 (usu. In pl.) Noteworthy features of a town etc. 6 a device on a gun, telescope, etc., for assisting aim or observation. B aim or observation so gained. 7 colloq. Unsightly person or thing (looked a sight). 8 colloq. Great deal (a sight too clever). v. 1 get sight of, observe the presence of (they sighted land). 2 aim (a gun etc.) With a sight.  at first sight on first glimpse or impression. At (or on) sight as soon as a person or a thing has been seen. Catch (or lose) sight of begin (or cease) to see or be aware of. In sight 1 visible. 2 near at hand. Set one's sights on aim at. [old english: related to *see1]
Since  prep. Throughout or during the period after (has been here since june; happened since yesterday). conj. 1 during or in the time after (what have you done since we met?). 2 because. adv. 1 from that time or event until now (has not seen him since). 2 ago (many years since). [old english, = after that]
Sinew  n. 1 tough fibrous tissue uniting muscle to bone; a tendon. 2 (in pl.) Muscles; bodily strength. 3 (in pl.) Strength or framework of a thing.  sinewy adj. [old english]
Singe  v. (-geing) 1 burn superficially; scorch. 2 burn off the tips of (hair). n. Superficial burn. [old english]
Sirup  n. (brit. Syrup) 1 a sweet sauce of sugar dissolved in boiling water. B similar fluid as a drink, medicine, etc. 2 condensed sugar-cane juice; molasses, treacle. 3 excessive sweetness of manner or style.  syrupy adj. [arabic sharab]
Sisal  n. 1 fibre made from a mexican agave. 2 this plant. [sisal, the port of yucatan]
Sitar  n. Long-necked indian lute. [hindi]
Sitka  n. (in full sitka spruce) fast-growing spruce yielding timber. [sitka in alaska]
Sixer  n. 1 cricket hit for six runs. 2 brownie or cub in charge of a group of six.
Skimp  v. 1 (often followed by on) economize; use a meagre or insufficient amount of, stint. 2 (often foll. By in) supply (a person etc.) Meagrely with food etc. 3 do hastily or carelessly. [cf. *scrimp]
Skirl  n. Shrill sound, esp. Of bagpipes. v. Make a skirl. [probably scandinavian]
Slate  n. 1 (esp. Bluish-grey) metamorphic rock easily split into flat smooth plates. 2 piece of this as a tile or hist. For writing on. 3 bluish-grey colour of slate. 4 list of nominees for office etc. v. (-ting) 1 roof with slates. 2 colloq. Criticize severely. 3 us make arrangements for (an event etc.). 4 us nominate for office etc. adj.
Sleep  n. 1 natural recurring condition of suspended consciousness, with the eyes closed and the muscles relaxed. 2 period of sleep (had a sleep). 3 state like sleep; rest, quiet, death. v. (past and past part. Slept) 1 a be in a state of sleep. B fall asleep. 2 (foll. By at, in, etc.) Spend the night. 3 provide beds etc. For (house sleeps six). 4 (foll. By with, together) have sexual intercourse, esp. In bed. 5 (foll. By on) put off (a decision) until the next day. 6 (foll. By through) fail to be woken by. 7 be inactive or dead. 8 (foll. By off) remedy by sleeping.  get to sleep manage to fall asleep. Go to sleep 1 begin to sleep. 2 (of a limb) become numb. Put to sleep 1 anaesthetize. 2 put down (an animal). Sleep around colloq. Be sexually promiscuous. Sleep in sleep later than usual in the morning. [old english]
Slice  n. 1 thin flat piece or wedge of esp. Food cut off or out. 2 share; part. 3 long-handled kitchen utensil with a broad flat perforated blade. 4 sport stroke that sends the ball obliquely. v. (-cing) 1 (often foll. By up) cut into slices. 2 (foll. By off) cut off. 3 (foll. By into, through) cut (as) with a knife. 4  strike (a ball) with a slice. [french esclice from germanic]
Slick  adj. Colloq. 1 a skilful or efficient. B superficially or pretentiously smooth and dexterous; glib. 2 sleek, smooth. n. Large patch of oil etc., esp. On the sea. v. Colloq. 1 (usu. Foll. By back, down) flatten (one's hair etc.). 2 (usu. Foll. By up) make sleek or smart.  slickly adv. Slickness n. [old english]
Sling  n. 1 strap etc. Used to support or raise a thing. 2 bandage supporting an injured arm from the neck. 3 strap etc. For firing a stone etc. By hand. v. (past and past part. Slung) 1 colloq. Throw. 2 suspend with a sling.  sling one's hook slang go away. [old norse or low german or dutch] 2.  n. Sweetened drink of spirits (esp. Gin) and water. [origin unknown]
Slope  n. 1 inclined position, direction, or state. 2 piece of rising or falling ground. 3 difference in level between the two ends or sides of a thing. 4 place for skiing on a mountain etc. v. (-ping) 1 have or take a slope, slant. 2 cause to slope.  slope arms place one's rifle in a sloping position against one's shoulder. Slope off slang go away, esp. To evade work etc. [aslope crosswise]
Slosh  v. 1 (often foll. By about) splash or flounder. 2 slang hit, esp. Heavily. 3 colloq. A pour (liquid) clumsily. B pour liquid on. n. 1 slush. 2 act or sound of splashing. 3 slang heavy blow. [var. Of *slush]
Slurp  colloq. v. Eat or esp. Drink noisily. n. Sound of this. [dutch]
Smarm  v. Colloq. 1 (often foll. By down) smooth, plaster flat (hair etc.). 2 be ingratiating. n. Colloq. Obsequiousness. [dial.]
Smile  v. (-ling) 1 have or assume a happy, kind, or amused expression, with the corners of the mouth turned up. 2 express by smiling (smiled a welcome). 3 give (a smile) of a specified kind (smiled a sardonic smile). 4 (foll. By on, upon) favour (fortune smiled on me). n. 1 act of smiling. 2 smiling expression or aspect. [perhaps from scandinavian]
Smirk  n. Conceited or silly smile. v. Give a smirk. [old english]
Smite  v. (-ting; past smote; past part. Smitten) 1 archaic or literary a hit. B chastise; defeat. 2 (in passive) affect strongly; seize (smitten with regret; smitten by her beauty). [old english]
Smock  n. 1 loose shirtlike garment often ornamented with smocking. 2 loose overall. v. Adorn with smocking. [old english]
Snack  n. 1 light, casual, or hurried meal. 2 small amount of food eaten between meals. [dutch]
Snafu  slang adj. In utter confusion. n. This state. [acronym of situation normal: all fouled (or fucked) up]
Snoop  colloq. v. 1 pry into another's affairs. 2 (often foll. By about, around) investigate transgressions of rules, the law, etc. n. Act of snooping.  snooper n. Snoopy adj. [dutch]
Snore  n. Snorting or grunting sound of breathing during sleep. v. (-ring) make this sound. [imitative]
Snort  n. 1 explosive sound made esp. By horses by the sudden forcing of breath through the nose. 2 similar human sound showing contempt, incredulity, etc. 3 colloq. Small drink of liquor. 4 slang inhaled dose of powdered cocaine etc. v. 1 make a snort. 2 (also absol.) Slang inhale (esp. Cocaine). 3 express or utter with a snort. [imitative]
Solan  n. (in full solan goose) large gooselike gannet. [old norse]
Solar  adj. Of or reckoned by the sun. [latin sol sun]
Sonar  n. 1 system for the underwater detection of objects by reflected sound. 2 apparatus for this. [sound navigation and ranging]
Sonny  n. Colloq. Familiar form of address to a young boy.
Sooth  n. Archaic truth. [old english]
Sough  v. Moan or whisper like the wind in trees etc. n. This sound. [old english]
Spank  v. 1 slap, esp. On the buttocks as punishment. 2 (of a horse etc.) Move briskly. n. Slap, esp. On the buttocks. [imitative]
Spasm  n. 1 sudden involuntary muscular contraction. 2 convulsive movement or emotion etc. 3 (usu. Foll. By of) colloq. Brief spell. [greek spasma from spao pull]
Spate  n. 1 river-flood (river in spate). 2 unexpected occurrence of similar events (spate of car thefts). [origin unknown]
Spawn  v. 1 a (of a fish, frog, etc.) Produce (eggs). B be produced as eggs or young. 2 produce or generate in large numbers. n. 1 eggs of fish, frogs, etc. 2 mycelium of mushrooms or other fungi. [anglo-french espaundre: related to *expand]
Specs  n.pl. Colloq. Spectacles. [abbreviation]
Spelt  past and past part. Of *spell1. 2.  n. A kind of wheat giving very fine flour. [old english]
Spend  v. (past and past part. Spent) 1 pay out (money). 2 a use or consume (time or energy). B use up (material etc.). 3 (as spent adj.) Having lost its original force or strength; exhausted.  spend a penny colloq. Go to the lavatory.  spender n. [latin: related to *expend]
Sperm  n. (pl. Same or -s) 1 = *spermatozoon. 2 semen. [greek sperma -mat-]
Spiel  n. Slang glib speech or story; sales pitch. [german, = game]
Splat  colloq. n. Sharp splattering sound. adv. With a splat. v. (-tt-) fall or hit with a splat. [abbreviation of *splatter]
Splay  v. 1 spread apart. 2 (of an opening) have its sides diverging. 3 construct (an opening) with divergent sides. n. Surface at an oblique angle to another. adj. Splayed. [from *display]
Spoof  n. & v. Colloq. 1 parody. 2 hoax, swindle. [invented word]
Spook  n. Colloq. Ghost. v. Esp. Us frighten, unnerve. [low german or dutch]
Spout  n. 1 projecting tube or lip used for pouring from a teapot, kettle, jug, etc., or on a fountain, roof-gutter, etc. 2 jet or column of liquid etc. v. 1 discharge or issue forcibly in a jet. 2 utter or speak at length or pompously.  up the spout slang 1 useless, ruined, broken down. 2 pregnant. [dutch]
Sprit  n. Small diagonal spar from the mast to the upper outer corner of a sail. [old english]
Spurn  v. Reject with disdain or contempt.  [old english]
Squib  n. 1 small hissing firework that finally explodes. 2 satirical essay. [perhaps imitative]
Stake  n. 1 stout sharpened stick driven into the ground as a support, boundary mark, etc. 2 hist. A post to which a condemned person was tied to be burnt alive. B (prec. By the) such death as a punishment. v. (-king) 1 secure or support with a stake or stakes. 2 (foll. By off, out) mark off (an area) with stakes. 3 establish (a claim).  stake out colloq. Place under surveillance. [old english] 2.  n. 1 sum of money etc. Wagered on an event. 2 (often foll. By in) interest or concern, esp. Financial. 3 (in pl.) A prize-money, esp. In a horse-race. B such a race. v. 1 wager. 2 us colloq. Support, esp. Financially.  at stake risked, to be won or lost. [old english]
Stall  n. 1 trader's booth or table in a market etc. 2 compartment for one animal in a stable or cowhouse. 3 fixed, usu. Partly enclosed, seat in the choir or chancel of a church. 4 (usu. In pl.) Each of the seats on the ground floor of a theatre. 5 a compartment for one person in a shower-bath etc. B compartment for one horse at the start of a race. 6 a stalling of an engine or aircraft. B condition resulting from this. v. 1 (of a vehicle or its engine) stop because of an overload on the engine or an inadequate supply of fuel to it. 2 (of an aircraft or its pilot) lose control because the speed is too low. 3 cause to stall. [old english] 2.  v. 1 play for time when being questioned etc. 2 delay, obstruct. [stall decoy: probably related to *stall1]
Stare  v. (-ring) 1 (usu. Foll. By at) look fixedly, esp. In curiosity, surprise, horror, etc. 2 reduce (a person) to a specified condition by staring (stared me into silence). n. Staring gaze.  stare a person in the face be evident or imminent. Stare a person out stare at a person until he or she looks away. [old english]
Stash  colloq. v. (often foll. By away) 1 conceal; put in a safe place. 2 hoard. n. 1 hiding-place. 2 thing hidden. [origin unknown]
Steak  n. 1 thick slice of meat (esp. Beef) or fish, usu. Grilled or fried. 2 beef cut for stewing or braising. [old norse]
Stern  adj. Severe, grim; authoritarian.  sternly adv. Sternness n. [old english] 2.  n. Rear part, esp. Of a ship or boat. [old norse: related to *steer1]
Stiff  adj. 1 rigid; inflexible. 2 hard to bend, move, or turn etc. 3 hard to cope with; needing strength or effort (stiff climb). 4 severe or strong (stiff penalty). 5 formal, constrained. 6 (of a muscle, person, etc.) Aching owing to exertion, injury, etc. 7 (of esp. An alcoholic drink) strong. 8 (foll. By with) colloq. Abounding in. adv. Colloq. Utterly, extremely (bored stiff). n. Slang 1 corpse. 2 foolish or useless person.  stiffish adj. Stiffly adv. Stiffness n. [old english]
Sting  n. 1 sharp wounding organ of an insect, snake, nettle, etc. 2 a act of inflicting a wound with this. B the wound itself or the pain caused by it. 3 painful quality or effect. 4 pungency, vigour. 5 slang swindle. v. (past and past part. Stung) 1 a wound or pierce with a sting. B be able to sting. 2 feel or give a tingling physical or sharp mental pain. 3 (foll. By into) incite, esp. Painfully (stung into replying). 4 slang swindle, charge exorbitantly.  sting in the tail unexpected final pain or difficulty. [old english]
Stomp  v. Tread or stamp heavily. n. Lively jazz dance with heavy stamping. [var. Of *stamp]
Store  n. 1 quantity of something kept available for use. 2 (in pl.) A articles gathered for a particular purpose. B supply of, or place for keeping, these. 3 a = *department store. B esp. Us shop. C (often in pl.) Shop selling basic necessities. 4 warehouse for keeping furniture etc. Temporarily. 5 device in a computer for keeping retrievable data. v. (-ring) 1 (often foll. By up, away) accumulate for future use. 2 put (furniture etc.) In a store. 3 stock or provide with something useful. 4 keep (data) for retrieval.  in store 1 kept in readiness. 2 coming in the future. 3 (foll. By for) awaiting. Set store by consider important. [french estore(r) from latin instauro renew]
Stout  adj. 1 rather fat, corpulent, bulky. 2 thick or strong. 3 brave, resolute. n. Strong dark beer.  stoutly adv. Stoutness n. [anglo-french from germanic]
Strum  v. (-mm-) 1 (often foll. By on; also absol.) Play on (a guitar, piano, etc.), esp. Carelessly or unskilfully. 2 play (a tune etc.) In this way. n. Sound or spell of strumming. [imitative: cf. *thrum1]
Study  n. (pl. -ies) 1 acquisition of knowledge, esp. From books. 2 (in pl.) Pursuit of academic knowledge. 3 private room used for reading, writing, etc. 4 piece of work, esp. A drawing, done for practice or as an experiment. 5 portrayal in literature etc. Of behaviour or character etc. 6 musical composition designed to develop a player's skill. 7 thing worth observing (his face was a study). 8 thing that is or deserves to be investigated. v. (-ies, -ied) 1 make a study of; investigate (a subject) (study law). 2 (often foll. By for) apply oneself to study. 3 scrutinize closely (a visible object). 4 learn (one's role etc.). 5 take pains to achieve (a result) or pay regard to (a subject or principle etc.). 6 (as studied adj.) Deliberate, affected (studied politeness). [latin studium]
Style  n. 1 kind or sort, esp. In regard to appearance and form (elegant style of house). 2 manner of writing, speaking, or performing. 3 distinctive manner of a person, artistic school, or period. 4 correct way of designating a person or thing. 5 superior quality or manner (do it in style). 6 fashion in dress etc. 7 pointed tool for scratching or engraving. 8 bot. Narrow extension of the ovary supporting the stigma. v. (-ling) 1 design or make etc. In a particular (esp. Fashionable) style. 2 designate in a specified way. [latin stilus]
Suede  n. (often attrib.) 1 leather with the flesh side rubbed to a nap. 2 cloth imitating it. [french, = sweden]
Sulfa  n. (brit. Sulpha) any of various sulphonamides (often attrib.: sulpha drug). [abbreviation]
Sulky  adj. (-ier, -iest) sullen or silent, esp. From resentment or bad temper.  sulkily adv. Sulkiness n. [perhaps from obsolete sulke hard to dispose of]
Sumac  n. (also sumach) 1 shrub with reddish conical fruits used as a spice. 2 dried and ground leaves of this used in tanning and dyeing. [french from arabic]
Sunni  n. (pl. Same or -s) 1 one of the two main branches of islam, accepting law based not only on the koran, but on muhammad's words and acts. 2 adherent of this branch. adj. (also sunnite) of or relating to sunni. [arabic sunna = way, rule]
Sushi  n. Japanese dish of balls of cold rice topped with raw fish etc. [japanese]
Swami  n. (pl. -s) hindu male religious teacher. [hindi svami]
Swank  colloq. n. Ostentation, swagger. v. Show off.  swanky adj (-ier, -iest). [origin uncertain]
Sward  n. Literary expanse of turf. [old english, = skin]
Swarf  n. Fine chips or filings of stone, metal, etc. [old norse]
Swath  n. (also swathe) (pl. -s) 1 ridge of cut grass or corn etc. 2 space left clear by a mower etc. 3 broad strip. [old english]
Swear  v. (past swore; past part. Sworn) 1 a (often foll. By to + infin. Or that + clause) state or promise solemnly or on oath. B (cause to) take (an oath) (swore them to secrecy). 2 colloq. Insist (swore he was fit). 3 (often foll. By at) use profane or obscene language. 4 (foll. By by) a appeal to as a witness in taking an oath (swear by almighty god). B colloq. Have great confidence in (swears by yoga). 5 (foll. By to; usu. In neg.) Say certainly (could not swear to it). n. Spell of swearing.  swear blind colloq. Affirm emphatically. Swear in induct into office etc. With an oath. Swear off colloq. Promise to abstain from (drink etc.). [old english]
Sweat  n. 1 moisture exuded through the pores, esp. From heat or nervousness. 2 state or period of sweating. 3 colloq. State of anxiety (in a sweat). 4 colloq. A drudgery, effort. B laborious task.
Swede  n. 1 a native or national of sweden. B person of swedish descent. 2 (swede) large yellow-fleshed turnip orig. From sweden. [low german or dutch]
Swiss  adj. Of switzerland or its people. n. (pl. Same) 1 native or national of switzerland. 2 person of swiss descent. [french suisse]
Swizz  n. (also swiz) colloq. 1 something unfair or disappointing. 2 swindle. [origin unknown]
Swoon  v. & n. Literary faint. [old english]
Synod  n. Church council of delegated clergy and sometimes laity. [greek, = meeting]
Synth  n. Colloq. = *synthesizer.
Tabla  n. Pair of small drums played with the hands, esp. In indian music. [arabic, = drum]
Tacho  n. (pl. -s) colloq. = *tachometer. [abbreviation]
Taffy  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Often offens. Welshman. [a supposed pronunciation of davy = david]
Taker  n. Person who takes a bet, accepts an offer, etc.
Talus  n. (pl. Tali) ankle-bone supporting the tibia. [latin, = ankle]
Tango  n. (pl. -s) 1 slow s. American ballroom dance. 2 music for this. v. (-goes, -goed) dance the tango. [american spanish]
Tapas  n.pl. (often attrib.) Small savoury esp. Spanish dishes. [spanish]
Tarot  n. (often attrib.) 1 (in sing. Or pl.) A pack of mainly picture cards used in fortune-telling. B any game played with a similar pack of 78 cards. 2 any card from a tarot pack. [french]
Taunt  n. Insult; provocation. v. Insult; provoke contemptuously. [french tant pour tant tit for tat, smart rejoinder]
Taxon  n. (pl. Taxa) any taxonomic group. [back-formation from *taxonomy]
Teach  v. (past and past part. Taught) 1 a give systematic information, instruction, or training to (a person) or about (a subject or skill) (taught me to swim). B (absol.) Practise this professionally. C communicate, instruct in (suffering taught me patience). 2 advocate as a moral etc. Principle (taught forgiveness). 3 (foll. By to + infin.) A instruct (a person) by example or punishment (that will teach you not to disobey). B colloq. Discourage (a person) from (that will teach you to laugh).  teachable adj. [old english]
Tease  v. (-sing) (also absol.) 1 a make fun of playfully, unkindly, or annoyingly; irritate. B allure, esp. Sexually, while withholding satisfaction. 2 pick (wool etc.) Into separate fibres. 3 dress (cloth) esp. With teasels. n. 1 colloq. Person fond of teasing. 2 act of teasing (only a tease).  tease out separate by disentangling. [old english]
Teddy  n. (also teddy) (pl. -ies) (in full teddy bear) soft toy bear. [teddy, pet form of theodore roosevelt]
Teeth  pl. Of *tooth.
Telex  (also telex) n. International system of telegraphy by teleprinters using the public telecommunications network. v. Send, or communicate with, by telex. [from *teleprinter, *exchange]
Telly  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. 1 television. 2 television set. [abbreviation]
Tempo  n. (pl. -s or -pi) 1 speed at which music is or should be played. 2 speed or pace. [latin tempus -por- time]
Tepee  n. (also teepee) n. American indian's conical tent. [dakota]
Tesla  n. Si unit of magnetic induction. [tesla, name of a scientist]
Therm  n. Unit of heat, esp. As the statutory unit of gas supplied, equivalent to 100,000 british thermal units (1.055 x 108 joules). [greek therme heat]
Thief  n. (pl. Thieves) person who steals, esp. Secretly. [old english]
Think  v. (past and past part. Thought) 1 be of the opinion (think that they will come). 2 judge or consider (is thought to be a fraud). 3 exercise the mind (let me think for a moment). 4 (foll. By of or about) a consider; be or become aware of. B form or entertain the idea of; imagine. 5 have a half-formed intention (i think i'll stay). 6 form a conception of. 7 recognize the presence or existence of (thought no harm in it). n. Colloq. Act of thinking (have a think).  think again revise one's plans or opinions. Think aloud utter one's thoughts as soon as they occur. Think better of change one's mind about (an intention) after reconsideration. Think fit see *fit1. Think little (or nothing) of consider to be insignificant. Think much (or a lot or highly) of have a high opinion of. Think out 1 consider carefully. 2 produce (an idea etc.) By thinking. Think over reflect upon in order to reach a decision. Think through reflect fully upon (a problem etc.). Think twice use careful consideration, avoid hasty action, etc. Think up colloq. Devise. [old english]
Titan  n. (often titan) person of very great strength, intellect, or importance. [greek, = member of a race of giants]
Tizzy  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. State of agitation (in a tizzy). [origin unknown]
Toast  n. 1 sliced bread browned on both sides by radiant heat. 2 a person or thing in whose honour a company is requested to drink. B call to drink or an instance of drinking in this way. v. 1 brown by radiant heat. 2 warm (one's feet, oneself, etc.) At a fire etc. 3 drink to the health or in honour of (a person or thing). [french toster roast]
Toils  n.pl. Net, snare. [toil from french: related to *toilet]
Tokay  n. A sweet hungarian wine. [tokaj in hungary]
Tonne  n. = *metric ton. [french: related to *ton]
Touch  v. 1 come into or be in physical contact with (a thing, each other, etc.). 2 (often foll. By with) bring the hand etc. Into contact with. 3 bring (two things) into mutual contact. 4 rouse tender or painful feelings in. 5 strike lightly. 6 (usu. With neg.) A disturb, harm, or affect. B have any dealings with. C consume, use (i don't touch alcohol). 7 concern. 8 a reach as far as, esp. Momentarily. B (usu. With neg.) Approach in excellence etc. (can't touch him for style). 9 modify (pity touched with fear). 10 (as touched adj.) Colloq. Slightly mad. 11 (usu. Foll.
Tough  adj. 1 hard to break, cut, tear, or chew. 2 able to endure hardship; hardy. 3 unyielding, stubborn, difficult (it was a tough job). 4 colloq. A acting sternly; hard (get tough with). B (of circumstances, luck, etc.) Severe, hard. 5 colloq. Criminal or violent. n. Tough person, esp. A ruffian.  toughen v. Toughness n. [old english]
Toxin  n. Poison produced by a living organism.
Trade  n. 1 a buying and selling. B this between nations etc. C business conducted for profit (esp. As distinct from a profession). D business of a specified nature or time (christmas trade; tourist trade). 2 skilled craft practised professionally. 3 (usu. Prec. By the) people engaged in a specific trade (the trade will never agree). 4 us transaction, esp. A swap. 5 (usu. In pl.) Trade wind. v. (-ding) 1 (often foll. By in, with) engage in trade; buy and sell. 2 a exchange in commerce. B exchange (insults, blows, etc.). C us swap. 3 (usu. Foll. By with, for) have a transaction with a person for a thing.  trade in (often foll. By for) exchange (esp. A used car) in part payment for another. Trade off exchange, esp. As a compromise. Trade on take advantage of.  tradable adj. Tradeable adj. [low german, = track: related to *tread]
Train  v. 1 a (often foll. By to + infin.) Teach (a person, animal, oneself, etc.) A specified skill, esp. By practice. B undergo this process (trained as a teacher). 2 bring or come to physical efficiency by exercise, diet, etc. 3 (often foll. By along, up) guide the growth of (a plant). 4 (usu. As trained adj.) Make (the mind, eye, etc.) Discerning through practice etc. 5 (often foll. By on) point or aim (a gun, camera, etc.) At an object etc. n. 1 series of railway carriages or trucks drawn by an engine. 2 thing dragged along behind or forming the back part of a dress, robe, etc. 3 succession or series of people, things, events, etc. (train of thought). 4 body of followers; retinue.  in train properly arranged or directed.  trainee n. [latin traho draw]
Trait  n. Characteristic. [latin tractus: related to *tract1]
Trice  n.  in a trice in an instant. [trice haul up, from low german and dutch]
Trick  n. 1 action or scheme undertaken to deceive or outwit. 2 illusion (trick of the light). 3 special technique; knack. 4 a feat of skill or dexterity. B unusual action (e.g. Begging) learned by an animal. 5 foolish or discreditable act; practical joke (a mean trick to play). 6 idiosyncracy (has a trick of repeating himself). 7 a cards played in one round of a card-game. B point gained in this. 8 (attrib.) Done to deceive or mystify (trick photography; trick question). v. 1 deceive by a trick; outwit. 2 (often foll. By out of) swindle (tricked out of his savings). 3 (foll. By into) cause to do something by trickery (tricked into marriage; tricked me into agreeing). 4 foil, baffle; take by surprise.  do the trick colloq. Achieve the required result. How's tricks? Colloq. How are you? Trick or treat esp. Us children's custom of calling at houses at hallowe'en with the threat of pranks if they are not given a small gift. Trick out (or up) dress or deck out. [french]
Trier  n. 1 person who perseveres. 2 tester, esp. Of foodstuffs.
Trike  n. Colloq. Tricycle. [abbreviation]
Trove  n. = *treasure trove. [anglo-french trove from trover find]
Tudor  adj. 1 of the royal family of england 14851603 or this period. 2 of the architectural style of this period, esp. With half-timbering. [owen tudor, name of the grandfather of henry vii]
Tummy  n. (pl. -ies) colloq. Stomach. [a childish pronunciation]
Turki  adj. Of a group of languages and peoples including turkish. n. This group.  turkic adj. [persian: related to *turk]
Turps  n. Colloq. Oil of turpentine. [abbreviation]
Tutti  mus. adj. & adv. With all voices or instruments together. n. (pl. -s) such a passage. [italian, pl. Of tutto all]
Twain  adj. & n. Archaic two. [old english, masculine form of *two]
Tweet  n. Chirp of a small bird. v. Make this noise. [imitative]
Twerp  n. (also twirp) slang stupid or objectionable person. [origin unknown]
Twill  n. Fabric so woven as to have a surface of diagonal parallel ridges.  twilled adj. [old english, = two-thread]
Twirl  v. Spin, swing, or twist quickly and lightly round. n. 1 twirling motion. 2 flourish made with a pen. [origin uncertain]
Udder  n. Baglike mammary organ of cattle etc., with several teats. [old english]
Ultra  adj. Extreme, esp. In religion or politics. n. Extremist. [see *ultra-]
Uniat  (also uniate) adj. Of the church in e. Europe or the near east, acknowledging papal supremacy but retaining its own liturgy etc. n. Member of such a church. [latin unio *union]
Upper  attrib. Adj. 1 higher in place; situated above another part. 2 higher in rank etc. (upper class). n. Part of a boot or shoe above the sole.  on one's uppers colloq. Very short of money. 2.  n. Slang amphetamine or other stimulant.
Usury  n. 1 lending of money at interest, esp. At an exorbitant or illegal rate. 2 interest at this rate.  usurious adj. [anglo-french or medieval latin: related to *use]
Utter  attrib. Adj. Complete, absolute.  utterly adv. [old english, comparative of *out] 2.  v. 1 emit audibly. 2 express in words. 3 law put (esp. Forged money) into circulation. [dutch]
Uvula  n. (pl. Uvulae) fleshy part of the soft palate hanging above the throat.  uvular adj. [latin diminutive of uva grape]
Valet  n. Gentleman's personal servant. v. (-t-) 1 work as a valet (for). 2 clean or clean out (a car). [french va(s)let, related to *varlet, *vassal]
Valor  n. (brit. Valour) courage, esp. In battle.  valorous adj. [latin valeo be strong]
Vegan  n. Person who does not eat animals or animal products. adj. Using or containing no animal products. [shortening of *vegetarian]
Viand  n. Formal (usu. In pl.) Article of food. [latin vivo live]
Vibes  n.pl. Colloq. 1 vibrations, esp. Feelings communicated. 2 = *vibraphone. [abbreviation]
Vicar  n. Clergyman of a church of england parish where he formerly received a stipend rather than tithes: cf. *rector 1. [latin vicarius substitute: related to *vice3]
Video  adj. 1 of the recording (or reproduction) of moving pictures on magnetic tape. 2 of the broadcasting of television pictures. n. (pl. -s) 1 such recording or broadcasting. 2 colloq. = *video recorder. 3 colloq. A film on videotape. v. (-oes, -oed) record on videotape. [latin, = i see]
Vigil  n. 1 keeping awake during the night etc., esp. To keep watch or pray. 2 eve of a festival or holy day. [latin vigilia]
Villa  n. 1 country house; mansion. 2 rented holiday home, esp. Abroad. 3 (usu. As part of an address) detached or semi-detached house in a residential district. [italian and latin]
Viper  n. 1 small venomous snake. 2 malignant or treacherous person. [latin]
Viral  adj. Of or caused by a virus.
Virus  n. 1 microscopic organism often causing diseases. 2  = *computer virus. [latin, = poison]
Visit  v. (-t-) 1 (also absol.) Go or come to see or inspect (a person, place, etc.). 2 stay temporarily with (a person) or at (a place). 3 (of a disease, calamity, etc.) Attack. 4  a (foll. By with) punish (a person). B (often foll. By upon) inflict punishment for (a sin). n. 1 a act of visiting. B temporary stay, esp. As a guest. 2 (foll. By to) occasion of going to a doctor etc. 3 formal or official call. [latin: related to *vision]
Vital  adj. 1 of or essential to organic life (vital functions). 2 essential, indispensable (of vital importance). 3 full of life or activity. 4 fatal (vital error). n. (in pl.) The body's vital organs, e.g. The heart and brain.  vitally adv. [latin vita life]
Vizor  var. Of *visor.
Vodka  n. Alcoholic spirit distilled esp. In russia from rye etc. [russian]
Voile  n. Fine semi-transparent fabric. [french, = *veil]
Wager  n. & v. = *bet. [anglo-french: related to *wage]
Waive  v. (-ving) refrain from insisting on or using (a right, claim, opportunity, etc.). [anglo-french weyver: related to *waif]
Wally  n. (pl. -ies) slang foolish or inept person. [origin uncertain]
Waste  v. (-ting) 1 use to no purpose or with inadequate result or extravagantly. 2 fail to use (esp. An opportunity). 3 (often foll. By on) a give (advice etc.) Without effect. B (often in passive) fail to be appreciated or used properly (she was wasted on him; feel wasted in this job). 4 wear gradually away; make or become weak. 5 devastate. adj. 1 superfluous; no longer needed. 2 not inhabited or cultivated. n. 1 act of wasting. 2 waste material. 3 waste region. 4 being used up; diminution by wear. 5 = *waste pipe.
Waver  v. 1 be or become unsteady; begin to give way. 2 be irresolute. 3 (of a light) flicker. [old norse: related to *wave]
Weeds  n.pl. (in full widow's weeds) archaic deep mourning worn by a widow. [old english, = garment]
Whirl  v. 1 swing round and round; revolve rapidly. 2 (foll. By away) convey or go rapidly in a vehicle etc. 3 send or travel swiftly in an orbit or a curve. 4 (of the brain etc.) Seem to spin round. n. 1 whirling movement. 2 state of intense activity (the social whirl). 3 state of confusion (in a whirl).  give it a whirl colloq. Attempt it. [old norse, and low german or dutch]
Whirr  n. Continuous rapid buzz or soft clicking sound. v. (-rr-) make this sound. [scandinavian]
Wodge  n. Colloq. Chunk, lump. [alteration of *wedge]
Worth  predic. Adj. (used like a preposition) 1 of a value equivalent to (is worth ?50; is worth very little). 2 such as to justify or repay (worth doing; not worth the trouble). 3 possessing or having property amounting to (is worth a million pounds). n. 1 what a person or thing is worth; the (usu. High) merit of (of great worth). 2 equivalent of money in a commodity (ten pounds' worth of petrol).  for all one is worth colloq. With one's utmost efforts. For what it is worth without a guarantee of its truth or value. Worth it colloq. Worth while. Worth one's salt see *salt. Worth one's weight in gold see *weight. Worth while (or one's while) see *while. [old english]
Wrath  n. Literary extreme anger. [old english: related to *wroth]
Wreak  v. 1 (usu. Foll. By upon) give play to (vengeance or one's anger etc.). 2 cause (damage etc.) (wreak havoc). [old english, = avenge]
Wreck  n. 1 the sinking or running aground of a ship. 2 ship that has suffered a wreck. 3 greatly damaged building, thing, or person. 4 (foll. By of) wretched remnant. v. 1 a seriously damage (a vehicle etc.). B ruin (hopes, a life, etc.). 2 cause the wreck of (a ship). [anglo-french wrec from germanic]
Xenon  n. Heavy inert gaseous element. [greek, neuter of xenos strange]
Xerox  n. Propr. 1 machine for copying by xerography. 2 copy thus made. v. (xerox) reproduce by this process.
Yahoo  n. Bestial person. [name of a race of brutes in gulliver's travels]
Yield  v. 1 produce or return as a fruit, profit, or result. 2 give up; surrender, concede. 3 a (often foll. By to) surrender; submit; defer to. B (as yielding adj.) Compliant; submissive; soft and pliable. 4 (foll. By to) give right of way to (other traffic). 5 (foll.
Yobbo  n. (pl. -s) slang = *yob.
Yodel  v. (-ll-; us -l-) sing with melodious inarticulate sounds and frequent changes between falsetto and normal voice in the manner of swiss mountain-dwellers. n. Yodelling cry.  yodeller n. [german]
Yokel  n. Rustic; country bumpkin. [perhaps dial.]
Yonks  n.pl. Slang a long time (yonks ago). [origin unknown]
Zilch  n. Esp. Us slang nothing. [origin uncertain]
Zloty  n. (pl. Same or -s) chief monetary unit of poland. [polish]